doc/adoc-scalar/riscv-crypto-spec-scalar.adoc, before:

[[riscv-doc-template]]
= RISC-V Cryptography Extensions Volume I: Scalar & Entropy Source Instructions
:description: A working template for documenting RISC-V architecture in asciidoc
:company: RISC-V.org
:revdate: 04/2021
:revnumber: 0.9.0
:revremark: Pre-release version
:url-riscv: http://riscv.org
:doctype: book
//:doctype: report
:preface-title: Preamble
:colophon:
:appendix-caption: Appendix
:imagesdir: images
:title-logo-image: image:risc-v_logo.png[pdfwidth=3.25in,align=center]
//:page-background-image: image:draft.svg[opacity=20%]
//:title-page-background-image: none
//:back-cover-image: image:circuit.png[opacity=25%]
// Settings:
:experimental:
:reproducible:
// needs to be changed? bug discussion started
//:WaveDromEditorApp: app/wavedrom-editor.app
:imagesoutdir: images
:icons: font
:lang: en
:listing-caption: Listing
:sectnums:
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:source-highlighter: pygments
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:source-highlighter: coderay
endif::[]
:data-uri:
:hide-uri-scheme:
:stem: latexmath
:footnote:
:xrefstyle: short

//:This is the preamble.

include::riscv-crypto-scalar-preface.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-introduction.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-audience.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sail-specifications.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-policies.adoc[]

include::riscv-crypto-scalar-profiles.adoc[]

[[crypto_scalar_extension]]
== Scalar Cryptography Extension

include::riscv-crypto-scalar-zkb.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-aes.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sha2.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sm3.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sm4.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-zkt.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-bibliography.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-encodings.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-entropy-source.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-materials.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-sail.adoc[]

Commit message:

doc: Use correct styles for asciidoc spec.
- Add official RISC-V docs-templates repo as submodule.

- Symlink "resources" directory so we automatically pick up changes
  and improvments to the styles in the scalar crypto document.

- Cannot compile unless "note" admonition icon is commented out in
  resources/themes/risc-v_spec.yml.
  Will raise an issue for this.

 On branch dev/next-release
 Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/dev/next-release'.

 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   ../../.gitmodules
	modified:   Makefile
	new file:   resources
	modified:   riscv-crypto-spec-scalar.adoc
	new file:   ../../extern/riscv-docs-templates

 Changes not staged for commit:
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-docs-templates (modified content)
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-gnu-toolchain (modified content)
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-isa-sim (untracked content)
	modified:   ../../extern/sail-riscv (untracked content)

doc/adoc-scalar/riscv-crypto-spec-scalar.adoc, after:

[[riscv-doc-template]]
= RISC-V Cryptography Extensions Volume I: Scalar & Entropy Source Instructions
:description: A working template for documenting RISC-V architecture in asciidoc
:company: RISC-V.org
:revdate: 04/2021
:revnumber: 0.9.0
:revremark: Pre-release version
:url-riscv: http://riscv.org
:doctype: book
//:doctype: report
:preface-title: Preamble
:colophon:
:appendix-caption: Appendix
:imagesdir: images
:title-logo-image: image:risc-v_logo.png[pdfwidth=3.25in,align=center]
//:page-background-image: image:draft.svg[opacity=20%]
//:title-page-background-image: none
//:back-cover-image: image:circuit.png[opacity=25%]
// Settings:
:experimental:
:reproducible:
// needs to be changed? bug discussion started
//:WaveDromEditorApp: app/wavedrom-editor.app
:imagesoutdir: images
:icons: font
:lang: en
:listing-caption: Listing
:sectnums:
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:source-highlighter: pygments
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:source-highlighter: coderay
endif::[]
:data-uri:
:hide-uri-scheme:
:stem: latexmath
:footnote:
:xrefstyle: short

//:This is the preamble.

include::riscv-crypto-scalar-preface.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-introduction.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-audience.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sail-specifications.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-policies.adoc[]

include::riscv-crypto-scalar-profiles.adoc[]

[[crypto_scalar_extension]]
== Scalar Cryptography Extension

As per the RISC-V Cryptographic Extensions Task Group charter:
_"The committee will also make ISA extension proposals for lightweight
scalar instructions for 32 and 64 bit machines that improve the performance
and reduce the code size required for software execution of common algorithms
like AES and SHA and lightweight algorithms like PRESENT and GOST."_

For context, some of these instructions have been developed based on academic
work at the University of Bristol as part of the XCrypto project
\cite{MPP:19},
and work by
Paris Telecom on acceleration of lightweight block ciphers
\cite{TGMGD:19}.

include::riscv-crypto-scalar-zkb.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-aes.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sha2.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sm3.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-sm4.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-zkt.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-bibliography.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-encodings.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-entropy-source.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-materials.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-sail.adoc[]
