doc/adoc-scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc, before:

[[crypto_scalar_es]]
== Entropy Source

The proposed RISC-V TRNG ISA is primarily an Entropy Source (ES)
interface. A valid implementation should satisfy properties that allow
it to be used to _seed_ standard and nonstandard cryptographic DRBGs of
virtually any state size and security level.

The purpose of this baseline specification is to guarantee that a
simple, device-independent driver component (e.g., in Linux kernel,
embedded firmware, or a cryptographic library) can use the ISA
instruction to generate truly random bits. See
<<crypto_scalar_appx_es>> for rationale and further
discussion. This section is also supported by 
cite:[SaNeMa20].

[[crypto_scalar_es_pollentropy]]
=== PollEntropy Instruction

The main ISA-level interface consists of a single pseudoinstruction,
`pollentropy`,
which returns a 32/64-bit value in a CPU register. It is invoked in
_Machine Mode_ (which may be the only mode) as follows:

Memonic::
pollentropy rd

It is an alias for `csrrs rd, mentropy, x0`

`pollentropy` reads `XLEN` bits from the mentropy read-only
machine-mode CSR described in the table below.

.The mentropy CSR. It uses address `0xF15`, a standard read-only machine-mode CSR.
[cols="^,^,<",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Bits |Name |Description
|`63:32` |_Set to 0_ |Upper bits are set to zero in RV64.

|`31:30` |`OPST` |Status: `BIST` (00), `ES16` (01), `WAIT` (10), `DEAD`
(11).

|`29:24` |_reserved_ |For future use by the RISC-V specification.

|`23:16` |_custom_ |Reserved for custom and experimental use.

|`15: 0` |`seed` |16 bits of randomness, only when `OPST=ES16`.
|=======================================================================

The instruction is *non-blocking* and returns immediately, either with
two status bits `mentropy[31:30]` = `OPST` set to `ES16` (01),
indicating successful polling, or with *no* entropy and one of three
polling failure statuses `BIST` (00), `WAIT` (10), or `DEAD` (11),
discussed below.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The sixteen bits of randomness in `mentropy[15:0]`=`seed` polled with
`ES16` status *must be cryptographically conditioned* before they can be
used as (up to 8 bits of) keying material. We suggest entropy output
be post-processed in blocks of at least 256 bits, with 128 bit resulting
output block.
====

When `OPST` is not `ES16`, `seed` must be set to 0. An implementation
may safely set reserved and custom bits to zeros. A polling software
interface must ignore their contents.

The Status Bits at `mentropy[31:30]`=`OPST`:

* `00` - `BIST`
indicates that Built-In Self-Test "on-demand" (BIST) statistical
testing is being performed. In typical implementations, `BIST` will last
only a few milliseconds, up to a few hundred. If the system returns
temporarily to `BIST` from any other state, this signals a non-fatal
(usually non-actionable) self-test alarm. BIST is also used to signal
test mode ().

* `01` - `ES16`
indicates success; the low bits `mentropy[15:0]` will have 16 bits of
randomness which must be guaranteed to have at least 8 bits true entropy
regardless of implementation. For example, `0x4000ABCD` is a valid
`ES16` status output on RV32, with `0xABCD` being the `seed` value.

* `10` - `WAIT`
means that a sufficient amount of entropy is not yet available. This
is not an error condition and may (in fact) be more frequent than ES16,
since true entropy sources may not have very high bandwidth. If polling
in a loop, we suggest calling (wait for interrupt) before the next poll.

* `11` - `DEAD`
is an unrecoverable self-test error. This may indicate a hardware
fault, a security issue, or (extremely rarely) a type-1 statistical
false positive in the continuous testing procedures. Implementations do
not need to implement `DEAD` as it may not require an end-user
notification; an immediate lock-down may be a more appropriate response
in dedicated security devices.

[[crypto_scalar_es_polling]]
=== Polling Mechanism with WFI

.Entropy Source state transition diagram.
Normally the operational state alternates between WAIT
(no data) and ES16, which means that 16 bits of randomness (seed)
has been polled. BIST (Built-in Self-Test) only occurs after reset
or to signal a non-fatal self-test alarm (if reached after WAIT or
ES16). DEAD is an unrecoverable error state.
In test mode (when GetNoise is active) WAIT and ES16 states are
unavailable in PollEntropy.
[graphviz, , svg]
....
digraph {TODO}
....

The diagram above illustrates operational
state (`OPST`) transitions. The state is usually either `WAIT` or
`ES16`. There are no mandatory interrupts. However, the polling
mechanism should be implemented in a way that allows even generic
non-interrupt drivers to benefit from interrupts.

We specifically recommend against busy-loop polling on this instruction
as it may have relatively low bandwidth. Even though no specific interrupt
sequence is specified, it is required that the `wfi` (wait for
interrupt) instruction is available.
Cores which implement `mentropy` must not raise an Illegal
Instruction Exception when executing `wfi` unless required to
do so by the Timeout Wait bit of the `mstatus` register,
as detailed in Section 3.1.6.5 of the Privileged ISA Manual cite:[_WaAs19A].
The RISC-V ISA allows `wfi` to be implemented as a `nop`.

To guarantee that no sensitive data is read twice and that different
callers don’t get correlated output, it is suggested that hardware
implements _wipe-on-read_ on the randomness pathway during each read
(successful poll). For the same reasons, only complete and fully
processed randomness words shall be made available via (no
half-conditioned buffers or even full buffers in `WAIT` state – even if
they are to be ignored by compliant callers).

[[crypto_scalar_es_req]]
=== Entropy Source Requirements

Output `seed` from `pollentropy` is not necessarily fully
conditioned randomness due to hardware limitations of smaller,
low-powered implementations. However minimum requirements are
defined. A caller should not use the output directly but poll
twice the amount of required entropy, cryptographically condition
(hash) it, and use that to seed a cryptographic DRBG.

The expectation is that `seed` output passes typical randomness
tests, but pseudorandom conditioner may cause weak entropy sources to
pass such tests as well. The results of such tests should not be
confused with the security or robustness of an entropy source.
Evaluation of entropy sources involves an investigation of the
stochastic model of the noise source, an analysis of the conditioning
component, continuous tests, etc. Entropy estimation (statistical
testing) is just a part of this process.

The specification of entropy source requirements is complicated by the
existence of two slightly conflicting standards -- NIST SP 800-90B
cite:[TuBaKe+18] for FIPS 140-3 and AIS 31 cite:[KiSc11] for Common
Criteria evaluations. RISC-V hardware vendors may design their entropy
sources to meet *either one of these standards* (as different type
of evidence is required for each certification). It is also possible for
implementations to meet both criteria. Alternatively, for virtual
entropy sources (DRBGs), the post-processed output must meet the
_256-bit security_ requirements of Category 5 post-quantum cryptography.

==== Virtual Entropy Sources – Secret State Size Requirement

An Entropy Source implementation can always output fully
conditioned, perfectly distributed numbers. However, it is required
that if a DRBG is used as a source, it must have an internal state with
_at least_ 256 bits of secret entropy (Example: a CTR_DRBG built from
AES-128 is not sufficient). Any implementation of the Entropy Source
that limits the security strength must not reduce it to less than
256 bits.

RISC-V requires drivers to implement at least 2-to-1 cryptographic
post-processing in software with the expectation that the final output
from this post-processing would should have "computationally bounded
full entropy".  The computational bound is set so that a
random-distinguishing attack should require computational resources
comparable or greater than those required for key searching a block cipher
with a 256-bit key (e.g., AES 256). This is equivalent to a Category 5
classical or quantum adversary
cite:[NI16] (Section 4.A.4 Security Strength Categories).

==== FIPS 140-3 / SP 800-90 IID Track

For FIPS 140-3 certification, vendors should design their physical entropy
sources so that they can be submitted to the  "IID track".
This usually requires post-processing of noise in hardware.

[NOTE]
====
NIST SP 800-90B
cite:[TuBaKe+18] and its  FIPS 140-3 Implementation Guidance
cite:[NICC20] (Section D.K.) are being revised at the time of writing.
The type of appropriate post-processing for IID track depends on
the physical noise source. Some simple post-processing methods are
currently considered to be part of the sampling ("digitization")
step of the process. Vetted or non-vetted conditioning may also be
required in hardware, forming a hardware-software conditioning chain.
====

* *E1 Entropy Requirement* - 
Each 16-bit output sample `seed` must have more than 8 bits of
independent, unpredictable randomness. This minimum requirement is
satisfied if (in a NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe+18] assessment) 128
bits of output entropy can be obtained from each 256-bit
(`16*16` bits) `pollentropy` output sequence via a vetted
cryptographic conditioning algorithm (see Section 3.1.5.1.2 in
cite:[TuBaKe+18]). This means that the actual SP 800-90B entropy
assessment must yield significantly more than 8 bits (vendors should
aim at 16).
Driver developers may make this conservative assumption but are not
prohibited from using more than twice the number of seed bits relative
to the desired resulting entropy.

* *E2 SP 800-90B IID* - 
The output must be close to _Independent and Identically Distributed_
(IID), meaning that the output distribution does not deteriorate over
time and that output words convey little information about each other.
This requirement is satisfied if the construction of the physical source
and sampling mechanism suggests nothing against the IID assumption
and the IID tests in Section 5 of NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe+18] are
consistently passed.

[NOTE]
====
Both requirements must be satisfied (E1 may appear looser
than E2). FIPS 140-3 certification of course imposes many additional
requirements.
====

==== Common Criteria / AIS 31 PTG.2 Class

For alternative Common Criteria certification (or self-certification)
vendors should target AIS 31 PTG.2 requirements cite:[KiSc11] (Sect. 4.3.).
Entropy sources
(`seed` bits) are viewed as "internal random numbers" in the context
of AIS 31. Note that PTG.2 does not preclude other certification levels
– especially PTG.3 when combined with appropriate post-processing and
DRBG on the software side.

For validation purposes, the PTG.2 requirements may be mapped to
security controls T1-3 (<<crypto_scalar_es_security_controls>>) and the
interface as follows:

* P1 *[PTG.2.1]* Start-up tests map to T1 and reset-triggered (on-demand)
`BIST` tests.
* P2 *[PTG.2.2]* Continuous testing total failure maps to T2 and the
`DEAD` state.
* P3 *[PTG.2.3]* Online tests are continuous tests of T2 – entropy output
is prevented in the `BIST` state.
* P4 *[PTG.2.4]* Is related to the design of effective entropy source health tests, which we encourage.
* P5 *[PTG.2.5]* Raw random sequence may be checked via the GetNoise
interface (<<crypto_scalar_es_getnoise>>).
* P6 *[PTG.2.6]* Test Procedure A cite:[KiSc11] (Sect 2.4.4.1) is part of is
part of the evaluation process, and we suggest self-evaluation using these tests even if Common Criteria certification is not sought by a vendor.
* P7 *[PTG.2.7]* Average Shannon entropy of "internal random bits"
exceeds 0.997.

Even though E1, E2, and post-processing imply that less than 16 of
`seed` bits may be designated as internal random bits for P7, we
recommend that all 16 ES bits meet this requirement.

[NOTE]
====
Common Criteria validation the SP 800-90B IID requirement
of E2 is not stated. However, it may also be satisfied – and the
H=0.997 level of P7 / PTG.2.7 leaves relatively little room for an
entropy defect (mutual entropy). Also note that the SP 800-90B
validation process is concerned with min-entropy, not Shannon entropy,
so these numbers are not directly comparable.
====

[[crypto_scalar_es_security_controls]]
=== Security Controls (Tests)

The primary purpose of a cryptographic entropy source is to produce
secret keying material. In almost all cases a hardware entropy source
must implement appropriate _security controls_ to guarantee
unpredictability, prevent leakage, detect attacks, and deny adversarial
control over the entropy output or ts generation mechanism. Security
controls are not mandatory for RISC-V (in case of virtual entropy
sources) but are required for security certification.

Many of the security controls built into the device are called "health
checks." Health checks can take the form of integrity checks, start-up
tests, and on-demand tests. These tests can be implemented in hardware
or firmware; typically both. Several are mandated by standards such as
NIST SP 800-90B cite:[NI19].
The choice of appropriate health tests depends on the
certification target, system architecture, the threat model, entropy
source type, and other factors.

Health checks are not intended for hardware diagnostics but for
detecting security issues – hence the default action should be aimed at
damage control (prevent weak crypto keys from being generated).
Additional "debug" mechanisms may be implemented if necessary, but
then the device must be outside production use.

* T1 *On-demand testing.* A sequence of simple tests is invoked via
resetting, rebooting, or powering-up the hardware (not an ISA signal).
The implementation will simply return `BIST` during the initial start-up
self-test period; in any case, the driver must wait for them to finish
before starting cryptographic operations. Upon failure the entropy
source will enter a no-output `DEAD` state.

* T2 *Continuous checks.* If an error is detected in continuous tests or
environmental sensors, the entropy source will enter a no-output state.
We define that a non-critical alarm is signaled if the entropy source
returns to `BIST` state from live (`WAIT` or `ES16`) states. Such a
`BIST` alarm should be latched until polled at least once. Critical
failures will result in `DEAD` state immediately. A hardware-based
continuous testing mechanism must not make statistical information
externally available, and it must be zeroized periodically or upon
demand via reset, power-up, or similar signal.

* T3 *Fatal error states,* Since the security of most cryptographic
operations depends on the entropy source, a system-wide "default deny"
security policy approach is appropriate for most entropy source
failures. A hardware test failure should at least result in the `DEAD`
state and possibly reset/halt. It’s a show stopper: The entropy source
(or its cryptographic client application) _must not_ be allowed to run
if its secure operation can’t be guaranteed.

[[crypto_scalar_es_getnoise]]
=== GetNoise Test Interface

The optional GetNoise interface allows access to "raw noise" and is
intended for manufacturer tests and validation of security
modules. It is must not be used as a source of randomness or for other
production use. Its contents and behavior must be interpreted in the
context of mvendorid, marchid, and mimpid CSR identifiers, so is
effectively "custom".

The interface consists of the mnoise machine-mode CSR, which (unlike
mentropy) is read-write. We define a pseudoinstruction for reading it:

Mnemonic::
getnoise rd 

It is an alias for `csrrs rd, mnoise, x0`.

The Entropy Source ISE defines the semantics of only a single bit,
`mnoise[31]`,
which is named `NOISE_TEST`. The only universal function is for
enabling/disabling this interface. This is because the test interface
effectively disables ; this way a soft reset can also reset this
feature.

The mnoise CSR uses address 0x7A9, indicating it is a standard
read-write machine-mode CSR. This places it adjacently to debug/trace
CSRs, indicating that it is not expected to be used in production.

When `NOISE_TEST = 1` in and mnoise, and mentropy *must not* return
anything via `ES16`; we recommend that it is in `BIST` state. When
`NOISE_TEST` is again disabled, the entropy source shall return from
`BIST` via a zeroization and self-test mechanism (effectively a reset).

When not implemented (e.g., in virtual machines), can permanently read
zero (`0x00000000`). When available, but `NOISE_TEST = 0`, can return a
nonzero constant such as `0x00000001`.

The behavior of other input and output bits is left to the vendor.
Although not used in production, we recommend that the instruction is
always non-blocking.

Commit message:

spec: scalar adoc: structure more like bitmanip, diagrams
 On branch dev/next-release
 Your branch is ahead of 'origin/dev/next-release' by 1 commit.
   (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   .gitignore
	new file:   images/es_state.svg
	deleted:    riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-encodings.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-entropy-source.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-appx-rationale.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc
	deleted:    riscv-crypto-scalar-preface.adoc
	deleted:    riscv-crypto-scalar-profiles.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zkb.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zkg.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zknd.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zkne.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zknh.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zkr.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zksed.adoc
	new file:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zksh.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-spec-scalar.adoc
	modified:   ../riscv-crypto-spec.bib

 Changes not staged for commit:
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-docs-templates (modified content)
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-gnu-toolchain (modified content)
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-isa-sim (untracked content)
	modified:   ../../extern/sail-riscv (untracked content)

doc/adoc-scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc, after:

[[crypto_scalar_es]]
== Entropy Source

The proposed RISC-V TRNG ISA is primarily an Entropy Source (ES)
interface. A valid implementation should satisfy properties that allow
it to be used to _seed_ standard and nonstandard cryptographic DRBGs of
virtually any state size and security level.

The purpose of this baseline specification is to guarantee that a
simple, device-independent driver component (e.g., in Linux kernel,
embedded firmware, or a cryptographic library) can use the ISA
instruction to generate truly random bits. See
<<crypto_scalar_appx_es>> for rationale and further
discussion. This section is also supported by 
cite:[SaNeMa20].

[[crypto_scalar_es_pollentropy]]
=== PollEntropy Instruction

The main ISA-level interface consists of a single pseudoinstruction,
`pollentropy`,
which returns a 32/64-bit value in a CPU register. It is invoked in
_Machine Mode_ (which may be the only mode) as follows:

Memonic::
pollentropy rd

It is an alias for `csrrs rd, mentropy, x0`

`pollentropy` reads `XLEN` bits from the mentropy read-only
machine-mode CSR described in the table below.

.The mentropy CSR. It uses address `0xF15`, a standard read-only machine-mode CSR.
[cols="^,^,<",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Bits |Name |Description
|`63:32` |_Set to 0_ |Upper bits are set to zero in RV64.

|`31:30` |`OPST` |Status: `BIST` (00), `ES16` (01), `WAIT` (10), `DEAD`
(11).

|`29:24` |_reserved_ |For future use by the RISC-V specification.

|`23:16` |_custom_ |Reserved for custom and experimental use.

|`15: 0` |`seed` |16 bits of randomness, only when `OPST=ES16`.
|=======================================================================

The instruction is *non-blocking* and returns immediately, either with
two status bits `mentropy[31:30]` = `OPST` set to `ES16` (01),
indicating successful polling, or with *no* entropy and one of three
polling failure statuses `BIST` (00), `WAIT` (10), or `DEAD` (11),
discussed below.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The sixteen bits of randomness in `mentropy[15:0]`=`seed` polled with
`ES16` status *must be cryptographically conditioned* before they can be
used as (up to 8 bits of) keying material. We suggest entropy output
be post-processed in blocks of at least 256 bits, with 128 bit resulting
output block.
====

When `OPST` is not `ES16`, `seed` must be set to 0. An implementation
may safely set reserved and custom bits to zeros. A polling software
interface must ignore their contents.

The Status Bits at `mentropy[31:30]`=`OPST`:

* `00` - `BIST`
indicates that Built-In Self-Test "on-demand" (BIST) statistical
testing is being performed. In typical implementations, `BIST` will last
only a few milliseconds, up to a few hundred. If the system returns
temporarily to `BIST` from any other state, this signals a non-fatal
(usually non-actionable) self-test alarm. BIST is also used to signal
test mode ().

* `01` - `ES16`
indicates success; the low bits `mentropy[15:0]` will have 16 bits of
randomness which must be guaranteed to have at least 8 bits true entropy
regardless of implementation. For example, `0x4000ABCD` is a valid
`ES16` status output on RV32, with `0xABCD` being the `seed` value.

* `10` - `WAIT`
means that a sufficient amount of entropy is not yet available. This
is not an error condition and may (in fact) be more frequent than ES16,
since true entropy sources may not have very high bandwidth. If polling
in a loop, we suggest calling (wait for interrupt) before the next poll.

* `11` - `DEAD`
is an unrecoverable self-test error. This may indicate a hardware
fault, a security issue, or (extremely rarely) a type-1 statistical
false positive in the continuous testing procedures. Implementations do
not need to implement `DEAD` as it may not require an end-user
notification; an immediate lock-down may be a more appropriate response
in dedicated security devices.

[[crypto_scalar_es_polling]]
=== Polling Mechanism with WFI

[[crypto_scalar_es_state,reftext="Entropy Source State Transition Diagram"]]
====
image::es_state.svg[title="Entropy Source state transition diagram.", align="center"]
Normally the operational state alternates between WAIT
(no data) and ES16, which means that 16 bits of randomness (seed)
has been polled. BIST (Built-in Self-Test) only occurs after reset
or to signal a non-fatal self-test alarm (if reached after WAIT or
ES16). DEAD is an unrecoverable error state.
In test mode (when GetNoise is active) WAIT and ES16 states are
unavailable in PollEntropy.
====

The diagram above illustrates operational
state (`OPST`) transitions. The state is usually either `WAIT` or
`ES16`. There are no mandatory interrupts. However, the polling
mechanism should be implemented in a way that allows even generic
non-interrupt drivers to benefit from interrupts.

We specifically recommend against busy-loop polling on this instruction
as it may have relatively low bandwidth. Even though no specific interrupt
sequence is specified, it is required that the `wfi` (wait for
interrupt) instruction is available.
Cores which implement `mentropy` must not raise an Illegal
Instruction Exception when executing `wfi` unless required to
do so by the Timeout Wait bit of the `mstatus` register,
as detailed in Section 3.1.6.5 of the Privileged ISA Manual cite:[_WaAs19A].
The RISC-V ISA allows `wfi` to be implemented as a `nop`.

To guarantee that no sensitive data is read twice and that different
callers don’t get correlated output, it is suggested that hardware
implements _wipe-on-read_ on the randomness pathway during each read
(successful poll). For the same reasons, only complete and fully
processed randomness words shall be made available via (no
half-conditioned buffers or even full buffers in `WAIT` state – even if
they are to be ignored by compliant callers).

[[crypto_scalar_es_req]]
=== Entropy Source Requirements

Output `seed` from `pollentropy` is not necessarily fully
conditioned randomness due to hardware limitations of smaller,
low-powered implementations. However minimum requirements are
defined. A caller should not use the output directly but poll
twice the amount of required entropy, cryptographically condition
(hash) it, and use that to seed a cryptographic DRBG.

The expectation is that `seed` output passes typical randomness
tests, but pseudorandom conditioner may cause weak entropy sources to
pass such tests as well. The results of such tests should not be
confused with the security or robustness of an entropy source.
Evaluation of entropy sources involves an investigation of the
stochastic model of the noise source, an analysis of the conditioning
component, continuous tests, etc. Entropy estimation (statistical
testing) is just a part of this process.

The specification of entropy source requirements is complicated by the
existence of two slightly conflicting standards -- NIST SP 800-90B
cite:[TuBaKe:18] for FIPS 140-3 and AIS 31 cite:[KiSc11] for Common
Criteria evaluations. RISC-V hardware vendors may design their entropy
sources to meet *either one of these standards* (as different type
of evidence is required for each certification). It is also possible for
implementations to meet both criteria. Alternatively, for virtual
entropy sources (DRBGs), the post-processed output must meet the
_256-bit security_ requirements of Category 5 post-quantum cryptography.

==== Virtual Entropy Sources – Secret State Size Requirement

An Entropy Source implementation can always output fully
conditioned, perfectly distributed numbers. However, it is required
that if a DRBG is used as a source, it must have an internal state with
_at least_ 256 bits of secret entropy (Example: a CTR_DRBG built from
AES-128 is not sufficient). Any implementation of the Entropy Source
that limits the security strength must not reduce it to less than
256 bits.

RISC-V requires drivers to implement at least 2-to-1 cryptographic
post-processing in software with the expectation that the final output
from this post-processing would should have "computationally bounded
full entropy".  The computational bound is set so that a
random-distinguishing attack should require computational resources
comparable or greater than those required for key searching a block cipher
with a 256-bit key (e.g., AES 256). This is equivalent to a Category 5
classical or quantum adversary
cite:[NI16] (Section 4.A.4 Security Strength Categories).

==== FIPS 140-3 / SP 800-90 IID Track

For FIPS 140-3 certification, vendors should design their physical entropy
sources so that they can be submitted to the  "IID track".
This usually requires post-processing of noise in hardware.

[NOTE]
====
NIST SP 800-90B
cite:[TuBaKe:18] and its  FIPS 140-3 Implementation Guidance
cite:[NICC20] (Section D.K.) are being revised at the time of writing.
The type of appropriate post-processing for IID track depends on
the physical noise source. Some simple post-processing methods are
currently considered to be part of the sampling ("digitization")
step of the process. Vetted or non-vetted conditioning may also be
required in hardware, forming a hardware-software conditioning chain.
====

* *E1 Entropy Requirement* - 
Each 16-bit output sample `seed` must have more than 8 bits of
independent, unpredictable randomness. This minimum requirement is
satisfied if (in a NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] assessment) 128
bits of output entropy can be obtained from each 256-bit
(`16*16` bits) `pollentropy` output sequence via a vetted
cryptographic conditioning algorithm (see Section 3.1.5.1.2 in
cite:[TuBaKe:18]). This means that the actual SP 800-90B entropy
assessment must yield significantly more than 8 bits (vendors should
aim at 16).
Driver developers may make this conservative assumption but are not
prohibited from using more than twice the number of seed bits relative
to the desired resulting entropy.

* *E2 SP 800-90B IID* - 
The output must be close to _Independent and Identically Distributed_
(IID), meaning that the output distribution does not deteriorate over
time and that output words convey little information about each other.
This requirement is satisfied if the construction of the physical source
and sampling mechanism suggests nothing against the IID assumption
and the IID tests in Section 5 of NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] are
consistently passed.

[NOTE]
====
Both requirements must be satisfied (E1 may appear looser
than E2). FIPS 140-3 certification of course imposes many additional
requirements.
====

==== Common Criteria / AIS 31 PTG.2 Class

For alternative Common Criteria certification (or self-certification)
vendors should target AIS 31 PTG.2 requirements cite:[KiSc11] (Sect. 4.3.).
Entropy sources
(`seed` bits) are viewed as "internal random numbers" in the context
of AIS 31. Note that PTG.2 does not preclude other certification levels
– especially PTG.3 when combined with appropriate post-processing and
DRBG on the software side.

For validation purposes, the PTG.2 requirements may be mapped to
security controls T1-3 (<<crypto_scalar_es_security_controls>>) and the
interface as follows:

* P1 *[PTG.2.1]* Start-up tests map to T1 and reset-triggered (on-demand)
`BIST` tests.
* P2 *[PTG.2.2]* Continuous testing total failure maps to T2 and the
`DEAD` state.
* P3 *[PTG.2.3]* Online tests are continuous tests of T2 – entropy output
is prevented in the `BIST` state.
* P4 *[PTG.2.4]* Is related to the design of effective entropy source health tests, which we encourage.
* P5 *[PTG.2.5]* Raw random sequence may be checked via the GetNoise
interface (<<crypto_scalar_es_getnoise>>).
* P6 *[PTG.2.6]* Test Procedure A cite:[KiSc11] (Sect 2.4.4.1) is part of is
part of the evaluation process, and we suggest self-evaluation using these tests even if Common Criteria certification is not sought by a vendor.
* P7 *[PTG.2.7]* Average Shannon entropy of "internal random bits"
exceeds 0.997.

Even though E1, E2, and post-processing imply that less than 16 of
`seed` bits may be designated as internal random bits for P7, we
recommend that all 16 ES bits meet this requirement.

[NOTE]
====
Common Criteria validation the SP 800-90B IID requirement
of E2 is not stated. However, it may also be satisfied – and the
H=0.997 level of P7 / PTG.2.7 leaves relatively little room for an
entropy defect (mutual entropy). Also note that the SP 800-90B
validation process is concerned with min-entropy, not Shannon entropy,
so these numbers are not directly comparable.
====

[[crypto_scalar_es_security_controls]]
=== Security Controls (Tests)

The primary purpose of a cryptographic entropy source is to produce
secret keying material. In almost all cases a hardware entropy source
must implement appropriate _security controls_ to guarantee
unpredictability, prevent leakage, detect attacks, and deny adversarial
control over the entropy output or ts generation mechanism. Security
controls are not mandatory for RISC-V (in case of virtual entropy
sources) but are required for security certification.

Many of the security controls built into the device are called "health
checks." Health checks can take the form of integrity checks, start-up
tests, and on-demand tests. These tests can be implemented in hardware
or firmware; typically both. Several are mandated by standards such as
NIST SP 800-90B cite:[NI19].
The choice of appropriate health tests depends on the
certification target, system architecture, the threat model, entropy
source type, and other factors.

Health checks are not intended for hardware diagnostics but for
detecting security issues – hence the default action should be aimed at
damage control (prevent weak crypto keys from being generated).
Additional "debug" mechanisms may be implemented if necessary, but
then the device must be outside production use.

* T1 *On-demand testing.* A sequence of simple tests is invoked via
resetting, rebooting, or powering-up the hardware (not an ISA signal).
The implementation will simply return `BIST` during the initial start-up
self-test period; in any case, the driver must wait for them to finish
before starting cryptographic operations. Upon failure the entropy
source will enter a no-output `DEAD` state.

* T2 *Continuous checks.* If an error is detected in continuous tests or
environmental sensors, the entropy source will enter a no-output state.
We define that a non-critical alarm is signaled if the entropy source
returns to `BIST` state from live (`WAIT` or `ES16`) states. Such a
`BIST` alarm should be latched until polled at least once. Critical
failures will result in `DEAD` state immediately. A hardware-based
continuous testing mechanism must not make statistical information
externally available, and it must be zeroized periodically or upon
demand via reset, power-up, or similar signal.

* T3 *Fatal error states,* Since the security of most cryptographic
operations depends on the entropy source, a system-wide "default deny"
security policy approach is appropriate for most entropy source
failures. A hardware test failure should at least result in the `DEAD`
state and possibly reset/halt. It’s a show stopper: The entropy source
(or its cryptographic client application) _must not_ be allowed to run
if its secure operation can’t be guaranteed.

[[crypto_scalar_es_getnoise]]
=== GetNoise Test Interface

The optional GetNoise interface allows access to "raw noise" and is
intended for manufacturer tests and validation of security
modules. It is must not be used as a source of randomness or for other
production use. Its contents and behavior must be interpreted in the
context of mvendorid, marchid, and mimpid CSR identifiers, so is
effectively "custom".

The interface consists of the mnoise machine-mode CSR, which (unlike
mentropy) is read-write. We define a pseudoinstruction for reading it:

Mnemonic::
getnoise rd 

It is an alias for `csrrs rd, mnoise, x0`.

The Entropy Source ISE defines the semantics of only a single bit,
`mnoise[31]`,
which is named `NOISE_TEST`. The only universal function is for
enabling/disabling this interface. This is because the test interface
effectively disables ; this way a soft reset can also reset this
feature.

The mnoise CSR uses address 0x7A9, indicating it is a standard
read-write machine-mode CSR. This places it adjacently to debug/trace
CSRs, indicating that it is not expected to be used in production.

When `NOISE_TEST = 1` in and mnoise, and mentropy *must not* return
anything via `ES16`; we recommend that it is in `BIST` state. When
`NOISE_TEST` is again disabled, the entropy source shall return from
`BIST` via a zeroization and self-test mechanism (effectively a reset).

When not implemented (e.g., in virtual machines), can permanently read
zero (`0x00000000`). When available, but `NOISE_TEST = 0`, can return a
nonzero constant such as `0x00000001`.

The behavior of other input and output bits is left to the vendor.
Although not used in production, we recommend that the instruction is
always non-blocking.
