doc/adoc-scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-zkb.adoc, before:

[[crypto_scalar_zkb]]
=== Bitmanip Instructions for Cryptography: ZKb

Many of the primitive operations used in symmetric key cryptography
and cryptographic hash functions are well supported by the
RISC-V Bitmanip cite:[riscv:bitmanip:repo] extension.

NOTE: At the time of writing, the Bitmanip extension is still undergoing
standardisation.
Please refer to the Bitmanip draft specification
cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft]
directly for the
latest information, as it may be slightly ahead of what is described
here.

We propose that the scalar cryptographic extension _reuse_ a
subset of the instructions from the Bitmanip extension directly.
Specifically, this would mean that
a core implementing
_either_
the scalar cryptographic extensions,
_or_
the Bitmanip extension,
_or_
both,
would be required to implement these instructions.
These instructions are grouped into a single named subset: `ZKb`.

==== Rotations

----
RV32, RV64:                         RV64 only:
    ror    rd, rs1, rs2                 rorw   rd, rs1, rs2
    rol    rd, rs1, rs2                 rolw   rd, rs1, rs2
    rori   rd, rs1, imm                 roriw  rd, rs1, imm
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 3.1.1) for details of
these instructions.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
Standard bitwise rotation is a primitive operation in many block ciphers
and hash functions; it features particularly in the ARX (Add, Rotate, Xor)
class of block ciphers and stream ciphers.

* Algorithms making use of 32-bit rotations:
  SHA256, AES (Shift Rows), ChaCha20, SM3.
* Algorithms making use of 64-bit rotations:
  SHA512, SHA3.
====


==== Bit & Byte Permutations

----
RV32:
    rev.b   rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1,  7 - Reverse bits in bytes
    rev8    rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1, 24 - Reverse bytes in 32-bit word

RV64:
    rev.b   rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1,  7 - Reverse bits in bytes
    rev8    rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1, 56 - Reverse bytes in 64-bit word
    rev8.w  rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1, 24 - Reverse bytes in 32-bit words
----

The scalar cryptography extension provides the following instructions for
manipulating the bit and byte endianness of data.
They are all parameterisations of the Generalised Reverse with Immediate
(`grevi` instruction.
The scalar cryptography extension requires _only_ the above instances
of `grevi` be implemented, which can be invoked via their pseudo-ops.

Cores which also implement the Bit-manipulation extension _must_
implement the complete `grevi` instruction as specified there, not the
minimal subset described here.
The full specification of the `grevi` instruction is available in
cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.2.2).

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
Reversing bytes in words is very common in cryptography when setting a
standard endianness for input and output data.
Bit reversal within bytes is used for implementing the GHASH component
of Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) cite:[nist:gcm].
====

----
RV32:
    zip     rd, rs1 // shfli   rd, rs1, 15 - Bit interleave
    unzip   rd, rs1 // unshfli rd, rs1, 15 - Bit de-interleave
----

The `zip` and `unzip` pseudo-ops are specific instances of
the more general `shfli` and `unshfli` instructions.
The scalar cryptography extension requires _only_ the above instances
of `[un]shfli` be implemented, which can be invoked via their
pseudo-ops.
Only RV32 implementations require these instructions.

Cores which also implement the Bit-manipulation extension _must_
implement the `[un]shfli` instruction as specified there, not the
minimal subset described here.
The full specification of the `shfli` instruction is available in
cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.2.3).

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
These instructions perform a bit-interleave (or de-interleave) operation, and
are useful for implementing the 64-bit rotations in the
SHA3 cite:[nist:fips:202] algorithm on
a 32-bit architecture.
On RV64, the relevant operations in SHA3 can be done natively using
rotation instructions, so `zip` and `unzip` are not required.
====


==== Carry-less Multiply

----
RV32, RV64:
    clmul  rd, rs1, rs2
    clmulh rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.6) for details of
this instruction.
See <<crypto_scalar_zkt>> for additional implementation
requirements for these instructions, related to data independent
execution latency.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
As is mentioned there, obvious cryptographic use-cases for carry-less
multiply are for Galois Counter Mode (GCM) block cipher operations.
GCM is recommended by NIST as a block cipher mode of operation
cite:[nist:gcm], and is the only _required_ mode for the TLS 1.3
protocol.
====

==== Logic With Negate

----
RV32, RV64:
    andn rd, rs1, rs2
     orn rd, rs1, rs2
    xnor rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.1.3) for details of
these instructions.
These instructions are useful inside hash functions, block ciphers and
for implementing software based side-channel countermeasures like masking.
The `andn` instruction is also useful for constant time word-select
in systems without the ternary Bitmanip `cmov` instruction.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
In the context of Cryptography, these instructions are useful for:
SHA3/Keccak Chi step,
Bit-sliced function implementations,
Software based power/EM side-channel countermeasures based on masking.
====

==== Packing

----
RV32, RV64:                         RV64: 
    pack   rd, rs1, rs2                 packw  rd, rs1, rs2
    packu  rd, rs1, rs2                 packuw rd, rs1, rs2
    packh  rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.1.4) for details of
these instructions.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
The `pack*` instructions are
useful for re-arranging halfwords within words, and
generally getting data into the right shape prior to applying transforms.
This is particularly useful for cryptographic algorithms which pass inputs
around as (potentially un-aligned) byte strings, but can operate on words
made out of those byte strings.
This occurs (for example) in AES when loading blocks and keys (which may not
be word aligned) into registers to perform the round functions.
====


==== Crossbar Permutation Instructions

----
RV32, RV64:
    xperm.n rd, rs1, rs2
    xperm.b rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.2.4) for a complete
description of this instruction.

The `xperm.n` instruction operates on nibbles.
`GPR[rs1]` contains a vector of `XLEN/4` 4-bit elements.
`GPR[rs2]` contains a vector of `XLEN/4` 4-bit indexes.
The result is each element in `GPR[rs2]` replaced by the indexed element
in `GPR[rs1]`, or zero if the index into `GPR[rs2]` is out of bounds.

The `xperm.b` instruction operates on bytes.
`GPR[rs1]` contains a vector of `XLEN/8` 8-bit elements.
`GPR[rs2]` contains a vector of `XLEN/8` 8-bit indexes.
The result is each element in `GPR[rs2]` replaced by the indexed element
in `GPR[rs1]`, or zero if the index into `GPR[rs2]` is out of bounds.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
The instruction can be used to implement arbitrary bit
permutations.
For cryptography, they can accelerate bit-sliced implementations,
permutation layers of block ciphers, masking based countermeasures
and SBox operations.

Lightweight block ciphers using 4-bit SBoxes include:
PRESENT cite:[block:present],
Rectangle cite:[block:rectangle],
GIFT cite:[block:gift],
Twine cite:[block:twine],
Skinny, MANTIS cite:[block:skinny],
Midori cite:[block:midori].

National ciphers using 8-bit SBoxes include:
Camellia cite:[block:camellia] (Japan), 
Aria cite:[block:aria] (Korea),
AES cite:[nist:fips:197] (USA, Belgium),
SM4 cite:[block:sm4:1] (China)
Kuznyechik (Russia).

All of these SBoxes can be implemented efficiently, in constant
time, using the `xperm.b` instruction
footnote:l[link:http://svn.clairexen.net/handicraft/2020/lut4perm/demo02.cc[]].
Note that this technique is also suitable for masking based
side-channel countermeasures.
====

Commit message:

spec: scalar - re-write profiles section to be more like bitmanip doc
 On branch dev/next-release
 Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/dev/next-release'.

 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-profiles.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zkb.adoc

 Changes not staged for commit:
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-docs-templates (modified content, untracked content)

doc/adoc-scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-zkb.adoc, after:

[[crypto_scalar_zkb]]
=== Bitmanip Instructions for Cryptography: ZKb

Many of the primitive operations used in symmetric key cryptography
and cryptographic hash functions are well supported by the
RISC-V Bitmanip cite:[riscv:bitmanip:repo] extension.

NOTE: At the time of writing, the Bitmanip extension is still undergoing
standardisation.
Please refer to the Bitmanip draft specification
cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft]
directly for the
latest information, as it may be slightly ahead of what is described
here.

NOTE: This section repeats much of the information in
<<crypto_scalar_ext_zkb>>, but includes more rationale.

We propose that the scalar cryptographic extension _reuse_ a
subset of the instructions from the Bitmanip extension directly.
Specifically, this would mean that
a core implementing
_either_
the scalar cryptographic extensions,
_or_
the Bitmanip extension,
_or_
both,
would be required to implement these instructions.
These instructions are grouped into a single named subset: `ZKb`.

==== Rotations

----
RV32, RV64:                         RV64 only:
    ror    rd, rs1, rs2                 rorw   rd, rs1, rs2
    rol    rd, rs1, rs2                 rolw   rd, rs1, rs2
    rori   rd, rs1, imm                 roriw  rd, rs1, imm
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 3.1.1) for details of
these instructions.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
Standard bitwise rotation is a primitive operation in many block ciphers
and hash functions; it features particularly in the ARX (Add, Rotate, Xor)
class of block ciphers and stream ciphers.

* Algorithms making use of 32-bit rotations:
  SHA256, AES (Shift Rows), ChaCha20, SM3.
* Algorithms making use of 64-bit rotations:
  SHA512, SHA3.
====


==== Bit & Byte Permutations

----
RV32:
    rev.b   rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1,  7 - Reverse bits in bytes
    rev8    rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1, 24 - Reverse bytes in 32-bit word

RV64:
    rev.b   rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1,  7 - Reverse bits in bytes
    rev8    rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1, 56 - Reverse bytes in 64-bit word
    rev8.w  rd, rs1 // grevi rd, rs1, 24 - Reverse bytes in 32-bit words
----

The scalar cryptography extension provides the following instructions for
manipulating the bit and byte endianness of data.
They are all parameterisations of the Generalised Reverse with Immediate
(`grevi` instruction.
The scalar cryptography extension requires _only_ the above instances
of `grevi` be implemented, which can be invoked via their pseudo-ops.

Cores which also implement the Bit-manipulation extension _must_
implement the complete `grevi` instruction as specified there, not the
minimal subset described here.
The full specification of the `grevi` instruction is available in
cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.2.2).

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
Reversing bytes in words is very common in cryptography when setting a
standard endianness for input and output data.
Bit reversal within bytes is used for implementing the GHASH component
of Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) cite:[nist:gcm].
====

----
RV32:
    zip     rd, rs1 // shfli   rd, rs1, 15 - Bit interleave
    unzip   rd, rs1 // unshfli rd, rs1, 15 - Bit de-interleave
----

The `zip` and `unzip` pseudo-ops are specific instances of
the more general `shfli` and `unshfli` instructions.
The scalar cryptography extension requires _only_ the above instances
of `[un]shfli` be implemented, which can be invoked via their
pseudo-ops.
Only RV32 implementations require these instructions.

Cores which also implement the Bit-manipulation extension _must_
implement the `[un]shfli` instruction as specified there, not the
minimal subset described here.
The full specification of the `shfli` instruction is available in
cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.2.3).

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
These instructions perform a bit-interleave (or de-interleave) operation, and
are useful for implementing the 64-bit rotations in the
SHA3 cite:[nist:fips:202] algorithm on
a 32-bit architecture.
On RV64, the relevant operations in SHA3 can be done natively using
rotation instructions, so `zip` and `unzip` are not required.
====


==== Carry-less Multiply

----
RV32, RV64:
    clmul  rd, rs1, rs2
    clmulh rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.6) for details of
this instruction.
See <<crypto_scalar_zkt>> for additional implementation
requirements for these instructions, related to data independent
execution latency.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
As is mentioned there, obvious cryptographic use-cases for carry-less
multiply are for Galois Counter Mode (GCM) block cipher operations.
GCM is recommended by NIST as a block cipher mode of operation
cite:[nist:gcm], and is the only _required_ mode for the TLS 1.3
protocol.
====

==== Logic With Negate

----
RV32, RV64:
    andn rd, rs1, rs2
     orn rd, rs1, rs2
    xnor rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.1.3) for details of
these instructions.
These instructions are useful inside hash functions, block ciphers and
for implementing software based side-channel countermeasures like masking.
The `andn` instruction is also useful for constant time word-select
in systems without the ternary Bitmanip `cmov` instruction.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
In the context of Cryptography, these instructions are useful for:
SHA3/Keccak Chi step,
Bit-sliced function implementations,
Software based power/EM side-channel countermeasures based on masking.
====

==== Packing

----
RV32, RV64:                         RV64: 
    pack   rd, rs1, rs2                 packw  rd, rs1, rs2
    packu  rd, rs1, rs2                 packuw rd, rs1, rs2
    packh  rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.1.4) for details of
these instructions.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
The `pack*` instructions are
useful for re-arranging halfwords within words, and
generally getting data into the right shape prior to applying transforms.
This is particularly useful for cryptographic algorithms which pass inputs
around as (potentially un-aligned) byte strings, but can operate on words
made out of those byte strings.
This occurs (for example) in AES when loading blocks and keys (which may not
be word aligned) into registers to perform the round functions.
====


==== Crossbar Permutation Instructions

----
RV32, RV64:
    xperm.n rd, rs1, rs2
    xperm.b rd, rs1, rs2
----

See cite:[riscv:bitmanip:draft] (Section 2.2.4) for a complete
description of this instruction.

The `xperm.n` instruction operates on nibbles.
`GPR[rs1]` contains a vector of `XLEN/4` 4-bit elements.
`GPR[rs2]` contains a vector of `XLEN/4` 4-bit indexes.
The result is each element in `GPR[rs2]` replaced by the indexed element
in `GPR[rs1]`, or zero if the index into `GPR[rs2]` is out of bounds.

The `xperm.b` instruction operates on bytes.
`GPR[rs1]` contains a vector of `XLEN/8` 8-bit elements.
`GPR[rs2]` contains a vector of `XLEN/8` 8-bit indexes.
The result is each element in `GPR[rs2]` replaced by the indexed element
in `GPR[rs1]`, or zero if the index into `GPR[rs2]` is out of bounds.

.Notes to software developers
[NOTE,caption="SH"]
====
The instruction can be used to implement arbitrary bit
permutations.
For cryptography, they can accelerate bit-sliced implementations,
permutation layers of block ciphers, masking based countermeasures
and SBox operations.

Lightweight block ciphers using 4-bit SBoxes include:
PRESENT cite:[block:present],
Rectangle cite:[block:rectangle],
GIFT cite:[block:gift],
Twine cite:[block:twine],
Skinny, MANTIS cite:[block:skinny],
Midori cite:[block:midori].

National ciphers using 8-bit SBoxes include:
Camellia cite:[block:camellia] (Japan), 
Aria cite:[block:aria] (Korea),
AES cite:[nist:fips:197] (USA, Belgium),
SM4 cite:[block:sm4:1] (China)
Kuznyechik (Russia).

All of these SBoxes can be implemented efficiently, in constant
time, using the `xperm.b` instruction
footnote:l[link:http://svn.clairexen.net/handicraft/2020/lut4perm/demo02.cc[]].
Note that this technique is also suitable for masking based
side-channel countermeasures.
====
