doc/scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-zbkb.adoc, before:

[[zbkb,Zbkb]]
=== `Zbkb` - Bitmanip instructions for Cryptography

These are a subset of the Bitmanipulation Extension which are particularly
useful for Cryptography.

[%header,cols="^1,^1,4,8"]
|===
|RV32
|RV64
|Mnemonic
|Instruction

| &#10003; | &#10003; |  ror         | <<insns-ror>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rol         | <<insns-rol>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rori        | <<insns-rori>>
|          | &#10003; |  rorw        | <<insns-rorw>>
|          | &#10003; |  rolw        | <<insns-rolw>>
|          | &#10003; |  roriw       | <<insns-roriw>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  andn        | <<insns-andn>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  orn         | <<insns-orn>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  xnor        | <<insns-xnor>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  pack        | <<insns-pack>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  packh       | <<insns-packh>>
|          | &#10003; |  packw       | <<insns-packw>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rev.b       | <<insns-revb>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rev8        | <<insns-rev8>>
| &#10003; |          |  zip         | <<insns-zip>>
| &#10003; |          |  unzip       | <<insns-unzip>>
|===

Commit message:

spec: scalar: Note Zbk* relationships with Bitmanip
 On branch dev/next-release
 Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/dev/next-release'.

 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zbkb.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zbkc.adoc
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-zbkx.adoc

 Changes not staged for commit:
	modified:   ../../extern/riscv-gnu-toolchain (modified content)
	modified:   ../../extern/sail-riscv (modified content, untracked content)

doc/scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-zbkb.adoc, after:

[[zbkb,Zbkb]]
=== `Zbkb` - Bitmanip instructions for Cryptography

These are a subset of the Bitmanipulation Extension which are particularly
useful for Cryptography.

NOTE: Some of these instructions are defined in the first Bitmanip
ratification package, and some are not (
<<insns-pack,pack>>,
<<insns-packh,packh>>,
<<insns-packw,packw>>,
<<insns-revb,rev.b>>,
<<insns-zip,zip>>,
<<insns-unzip,unzip>>).
All of the instructions in <<zbkb>> have their complete specification included
in this document, including those _not_ present in the initial
Bitmanip ratification package.
This is to make the specification complete as a standalone document.
Inevitably there might be small divergences between the Bitmanip and
Scalar Cryptography specification documents.
When this happens, assume that the Bitmanip specification has the
most up-to-date version of Bitmanip instructions.
This is an unfortunate but neccessary stop-gap while Scalar Cryptography
and Bitmanip are being rapidly iterated on prior to public review.

[%header,cols="^1,^1,4,8"]
|===
|RV32
|RV64
|Mnemonic
|Instruction

| &#10003; | &#10003; |  ror         | <<insns-ror>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rol         | <<insns-rol>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rori        | <<insns-rori>>
|          | &#10003; |  rorw        | <<insns-rorw>>
|          | &#10003; |  rolw        | <<insns-rolw>>
|          | &#10003; |  roriw       | <<insns-roriw>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  andn        | <<insns-andn>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  orn         | <<insns-orn>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  xnor        | <<insns-xnor>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  pack        | <<insns-pack>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  packh       | <<insns-packh>>
|          | &#10003; |  packw       | <<insns-packw>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rev.b       | <<insns-revb>>
| &#10003; | &#10003; |  rev8        | <<insns-rev8>>
| &#10003; |          |  zip         | <<insns-zip>>
| &#10003; |          |  unzip       | <<insns-unzip>>
|===
