doc/scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc, before:

[[crypto_scalar_es]]
== Entropy Source

The `seed` CSR provides an interface to a NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] 
or BSI AIS-31 cite:[KiSc11] compliant physical Entropy Source (ES).

An entropy source, by itself, is not a cryptographically secure Random
Bit Generator (RBG), but can be used to build standard (and nonstandard)
RBGs of many types with the help of symmetric cryptography. Expected usage
is to condition (typically with SHA-2/3) the output from an entropy source and
use it to seed a cryptographically secure Deterministic Random Bit Generator
(DRBG) such as AES-based `CTR_DRBG` cite:[BaKe15].
The combination of an Entropy Source, Conditioning, and a DRBG can be used
to create random bits securely cite:[BaKeRo:21].
See <<crypto_scalar_appx_es>> for a non-normative description of a
certification and self-certification procedures, design rationale, and more detailed suggestions on how the entropy source output can be used.

[[crypto_scalar_seed_csr]]
=== the seed CSR

The `seed` CSR is located at address `0x015`. 
The 32-bit contents of `seed` are as follows:

[%autowidth.stretch,cols="^,^,<",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Bits |Name |Description

|`31:30` |`OPST` |Status: `BIST` (00), `WAIT` (01), `ES16` (10), `DEAD`
(11).

|`29:24` |_reserved_ |For future use by the RISC-V specification.

|`23:16` |_custom_ |Designated for custom and experimental use.

|`15: 0` |`entropy` |16 bits of randomness, only when `OPST=ES16`.
|=======================================================================

The `seed` CSR must be accessed with a read-write instruction. A read-only
instruction such as `CSRRS/CSRRC` with `rs1=x0` or `CSRRSI/CSRRCI` with
`uimm=0` will raise an illegal instruction exception.
The write value (in `rs1` or `uimm`) should be ignored by implementations.
Its purpose is to merely signal polling and flushing.

The instruction `csrrw rd, seed, x0` can be used for fetching seed status
and entropy values. It is available on both RV32 and RV64 base architectures
and will zero-extend the 32-bit word to XLEN bits.

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 0x73, attr: "SYSTEM"},
{bits: 5, name: 'rd'},
{bits: 3, name: 0x1, attr: "CSRRW"},
{bits: 5, name: 0x0, attr: "x0"},
{bits: 12, name: 0x15, attr: "seed = 0x015"},
]}
....

The `seed` CSR is also access controlled by execution mode, and attempted
read or write access will raise an illegal instruction exception outside M mode
unless access is explicitly granted. See <<crypto_scalar_es_access>> for
more details.

The status bits `seed[31:30]` = `OPST` may be `ES16` (10),
indicating successful polling, or one of three entropy polling failure
statuses `BIST` (00), `WAIT` (01), or `DEAD` (11), discussed below.

Each returned `seed[15:0]` = `entropy` value represents unique randomness
when `OPST`=`ES16` (`seed[31:30]` = `10`), even if its numerical value is
the same as that of a previously polled `entropy` value. The implementation
requirements of `entropy` bits are defined in <<crypto_scalar_es_req>>.
When `OPST` is not `ES16`, `entropy` must be set to 0.
An implementation may safely set reserved and custom bits to zeros.

For security reasons, the interface guarantees that secret `entropy`
words are not made available multiple times. Hence polling (reading) must
also have the side effect of clearing (wipe-on-read) the `entropy` contents and
changing the state to `WAIT` (unless there is `entropy`
immediately available for `ES16`). Other states (`BIST`, `WAIT`, and `DEAD`)
may be unaffected by polling.

The Status Bits returned in `seed[31:30]`=`OPST`:

* `00` - `BIST`
indicates that Built-In Self-Test "on-demand" (BIST) testing is being
performed. If `OPST` returns temporarily to `BIST` from any other
state, this signals a non-fatal self-test alarm,
which is non-actionable, apart from being logged.
Such a `BIST` alarm must be latched until polled at least once to enable
software to record its occurence.

* `01` - `WAIT`
means that a sufficient amount of entropy is not yet available. This
is not an error condition and may (in fact) be more frequent than ES16
since physical entropy sources often have low bandwidth.

* `10` - `ES16`
indicates success; the low bits `seed[15:0]` will have 16 bits of
randomness (`entropy`), which is guaranteed to meet certain minimum entropy
requirements, regardless of implementation.

* `11` - `DEAD`
is an unrecoverable self-test error. This may indicate a hardware
fault, a security issue, or (extremely rarely) a type-1 statistical
false positive in the continuous testing procedures. In case of a fatal
failure, an immediate lockdown may also be an appropriate response in
dedicated security devices.

**Example.** `0x8000ABCD` is a valid `ES16` status output, with `0xABCD`
being the `entropy` value. `0xFFFFFFFF` is an invalid output (`DEAD`) with
no `entropy` value.

[[crypto_scalar_es_state,reftext="Entropy Source State Transition Diagram"]]
====
image::es_state.svg[title="Entropy Source state transition diagram.", align="center",scaledwidth=40%]
Normally the operational state alternates between WAIT
(no data) and ES16, which means that 16 bits of randomness (`entropy`)
have been polled. BIST (Built-in Self-Test) only occurs after reset
or to signal a non-fatal self-test alarm (if reached after WAIT or
ES16). DEAD is an unrecoverable error state.
====

[[crypto_scalar_es_req]]
=== Entropy Source Requirements

The output `entropy` (`seed[15:0]` in ES16 state) is not necessarily
fully conditioned randomness due to hardware and energy limitations
of smaller, low-powered implementations. However, minimum requirements are
defined. The main requirement is that 2-to-1 cryptographic post-processing
in 256-bit input blocks will yield 128-bit "full entropy" output blocks.
Entropy source users may make this conservative assumption but are not
prohibited from using more than twice the number of seed bits relative
to the desired resulting entropy.

An implementation of the entropy source should meet at least one of the
following requirements sets in order to be considered a secure and
safe design:

*	<<crypto_scalar_es_req_90b>>: A physical entropy source meeting
	NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] criteria with evaluated min-entropy
	of 192 bits for each 256 output bits (min-entropy rate 0.75).

*	<<crypto_scalar_es_req_ptg2>>: A physical entropy source meeting the
	AIS-31 PTG.2 cite:[KiSc11] criteria, implying average Shannon entropy
	rate 0.997. The source must also meet the NIST 800-90B 
	min-entropy rate 192/256 = 0.75.
	
*	<<crypto_scalar_es_req_virt>>: A virtual entropy source is a DRBG
	seeded from a physical entropy source. It must have at least a
	256-bit (Post-Quantum Category 5) internal security level.

All implementations must signal initialization, test mode, and health
alarms as required by respective standards. This may require the implementer
to add non-standard (custom) test interfaces in a secure and safe manner,
an example of which is described in <<crypto_scalar_es_getnoise>>


[[crypto_scalar_es_req_90b]]
==== NIST SP 800-90B / FIPS 140-3 Requirements

All NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] required components and heath test 
mechanisms must be implemented. 

The entropy requirement is satisfied if 128 bits of _full entropy_ can be
obtained from each 256-bit (16*16 -bit) successful, but possibly
non-consecutive `entropy` (ES16) output sequence using a vetted conditioning
algorithm such as a cryptographic hash
(See Section 3.1.5.1.2, SP 800-90B). In practice, a min-entropy
rate of 0.75 or larger is required for this. 

Note that 128 bits of estimated input min-entropy does not yield 128 bits of 
conditioned, full entropy in SP 800-90B/C evaluation. Instead, the
implication is that every 256-bit sequence should have min-entropy of at
least 128+64 = 192 bits, as discussed in SP 800-90C cite:[BaKeRo:21];
the likelihood of successfully "guessing" an individual 256-bit output
sequence should not be higher than 2^-192^ even with (almost)
unconstrained amount of entropy source data and computational power.

Rather than attempting to define all the mathematical and architectural
properties that the entropy source must satisfy, we define that the physical
entropy source be strong and robust enough to pass the equivalent of
NIST SP 800-90 evaluation and certification for full entropy when
conditioned cryptographically in ratio 2:1 with 128-bit output blocks.

Even though the requirement is defined in terms of 128-bit full entropy
blocks, we recommend 256-bit security. This can be accomplished by using
at least 512 `entropy` bits to initialize a DRBG that has 256-bit security.

[[crypto_scalar_es_req_ptg2]]
==== BSI AIS-31 PTG.2 / Common Criteria Requirements

For alternative Common Criteria certification (or self-certification), 
AIS 31 PTG.2 class cite:[KiSc11] (Sect. 4.3.) required hardware components
and mechanisms must be implemented.
In addition to AIS-31 PTG.2 randomness requirements (Shannon entropy rate of
0.997 as evaluated in that standard), the overall min-entropy requirement of
remains, as discussed in <<crypto_scalar_es_req_90b>>. Note that 800-90B
min-entropy can be significantly lower than AIS-31 Shannon entropy. These
two metrics should not be equated or confused with each other.


[[crypto_scalar_es_req_virt]]
==== Virtual Sources: Security Requirement

NOTE: A virtual source is not an ISA compliance requirement. It is defined
for the benefit of the RISC-V security ecosystem so that virtual systems
may have a consistent level of security.

A virtual source is not a physical entropy source but provides
additional protection against covert channels, depletion attacks, and host
identification in operating environments that can not be entirely trusted
with direct access to a hardware resource. Despite limited trust,
implementors should try to guarantee that even such environments have
sufficient entropy available for secure cryptographic operations.

A virtual source traps access to the `seed` CSR, emulates it, or
otherwise implements it without direct access to a physical entropy
source. The output can be cryptographically secure pseudorandomness
instead of real entropy, but must have at least 256-bit security, as defined
below. A virtual source is intended especially for guest operating
systems, sandboxes, emulators, and similar use cases.

As a technical definition, a random-distinguishing attack against
the output should require computational resources comparable or greater
than those required for exhaustive key search on a secure block cipher
with a 256-bit key (e.g., AES 256). This applies to both classical
and quantum computing models, but only classical information flows.
The virtual source security requirement maps to Post-Quantum Security
Category 5 cite:[NI16], so that virtual sources can be used for cryptography.

Any implementation of the `seed` CSR that limits the security
strength shall not reduce it to less than 256 bits. If the security
level is under 256 bits, then the interface must not be available.

A virtual entropy source does not need to implement `WAIT` or `BIST` states.
It should fail (`DEAD`) if the host DRBG or entropy source fails and
there is insufficient seeding material for the host DRBG.


[[crypto_scalar_es_access]]
=== Access Control to `seed`

The `seed` CSR is by default only available in M mode, but can be made
available to other modes via the `mseccfg.sseed` and `mseccfg.useed`
access control bits. `sseed` is bit `9` of and `useed` is
bit `8` of the `mseccfg` CSR.
Without the corresponding access control bit set to 1,
an attempted read or write access to `seed` from `U`, `S`, or
other non-`M` modes will raise an Illegal Instruction Exception.

.Entropy Source Access Control.

[cols="1,1,1,7",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Mode | `sseed` | `useed` | Description

| `M`
| `*`
| `*`
| The `seed` CSR is always available in machine mode as normal (with a
CSR read-write instruction. Attempted read without a write raises an
Illegal Instruction Exception regardless of mode access control bits).

| `S/HS`
| `0`
| `*`
| Any `seed` CSR access raises an Illegal Instruction Exception.

| `S/HS`
| `1`
| `*`
| The `seed` CSR is accessible as normal. No exception is raised for read-write.

| `U/HU`
| `*`
| `0`
| Any `seed` CSR access raises an Illegal Instruction Exception.

| `U/HU`
| `*`
| `1`
| The `seed` CSR is accessible as normal. No exception is raised for read-write.

|=======================================================================

M-mode can trap attempted access to `seed` and feed a
less privileged guest _virtual entropy source_ data 
(<<crypto_scalar_es_req_virt>>) instead of invoking an SP 800-90B 
(<<crypto_scalar_es_req_90b>>) or PTG.2 (<<crypto_scalar_es_req_ptg2>>)
_physical entropy source_. Output generation is made with an appropriately
seeded software DRBG. Systems should implement carefully considered access
control policies from  lower privilege modes to physical entropy sources.
See  <<crypto_scalar_appx_es_access>> for security considerations related
to direct access to entropy sources.

Note that additional modes such as `HS`, `VS`, and `VU` are present
in systems with Hypervisor (H) extension implemented. Without additional
hardware access control mechanisms, direct access from all of these to the
physical source is controlled via `mseccfg.sseed` and `mseccfg.useed.`

Implementations may implement `mseccfg` such that `[s,u]seed` is a read-only
constant value `0`. Software may discover if access to the `seed` CSR can be
enabled in `U` and `S` mode by writing a `1` to `[s,u]seed` and reading back
the result.

If `S` or `U` mode is not implemented, then the corresponding `[s,u]seed`
bits of `mseccfg` must be hardwired to zero.
The `[s,u]seed` bits must have a defined reset value. The system
must not allow them to be in an undefined state after a reset.
`mseccfg` exists if `Zkr` is implemented, or if it is required by other
processor features. If `Zkr` is _not_ implemented, the `[s,u]seed` bits must
be hardwired to zero.

Commit message:

spec: scalar: es wording and oeprating mode fixes
 On branch master
 Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'.

 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc

doc/scalar/riscv-crypto-scalar-entropy-source.adoc, after:

[[crypto_scalar_es]]
== Entropy Source

The `seed` CSR provides an interface to a NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] 
or BSI AIS-31 cite:[KiSc11] compliant physical Entropy Source (ES).

An entropy source, by itself, is not a cryptographically secure Random
Bit Generator (RBG), but can be used to build standard (and nonstandard)
RBGs of many types with the help of symmetric cryptography. Expected usage
is to condition (typically with SHA-2/3) the output from an entropy source and
use it to seed a cryptographically secure Deterministic Random Bit Generator
(DRBG) such as AES-based `CTR_DRBG` cite:[BaKe15].
The combination of an Entropy Source, Conditioning, and a DRBG can be used
to create random bits securely cite:[BaKeRo:21].
See <<crypto_scalar_appx_es>> for a non-normative description of a
certification and self-certification procedures, design rationale, and more detailed suggestions on how the entropy source output can be used.

[[crypto_scalar_seed_csr]]
=== The seed CSR

`seed` is a user mode CSR located at address `0x015`. 
The 32-bit contents of `seed` are as follows:

[%autowidth.stretch,cols="^,^,<",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Bits |Name |Description

|`31:30` |`OPST` |Status: `BIST` (00), `WAIT` (01), `ES16` (10), `DEAD`
(11).

|`29:24` |_reserved_ |For future use by the RISC-V specification.

|`23:16` |_custom_ |Designated for custom and experimental use.

|`15: 0` |`entropy` |16 bits of randomness, only when `OPST=ES16`.
|=======================================================================

The `seed` CSR must be accessed with a read-write instruction. A read-only
instruction such as `CSRRS/CSRRC` with `rs1=x0` or `CSRRSI/CSRRCI` with
`uimm=0` will raise an illegal instruction exception.
The write value (in `rs1` or `uimm`) must be ignored by implementations.
Its purpose is to signal polling and flushing, and avoid introducing
side effects (i.e. wipe-on-read, described below) due to a CSR read into the
architecture.

The instruction `csrrw rd, seed, x0` can be used for fetching seed status
and entropy values. It is available on both RV32 and RV64 base architectures
and will zero-extend the 32-bit word to XLEN bits.

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 0x73, attr: "SYSTEM"},
{bits: 5, name: 'rd'},
{bits: 3, name: 0x1, attr: "CSRRW"},
{bits: 5, name: 0x0, attr: "x0"},
{bits: 12, name: 0x15, attr: "seed = 0x015"},
]}
....

The `seed` CSR is also access controlled by execution mode, and attempted
read or write access will raise an illegal instruction exception outside M mode
unless access is explicitly granted. See <<crypto_scalar_es_access>> for
more details.

The status bits `seed[31:30]` = `OPST` may be `ES16` (10),
indicating successful polling, or one of three entropy polling failure
statuses `BIST` (00), `WAIT` (01), or `DEAD` (11), discussed below.

Each returned `seed[15:0]` = `entropy` value represents unique randomness
when `OPST`=`ES16` (`seed[31:30]` = `10`), even if its numerical value is
the same as that of a previously polled `entropy` value. The implementation
requirements of `entropy` bits are defined in <<crypto_scalar_es_req>>.
When `OPST` is not `ES16`, `entropy` must be set to 0.
An implementation may safely set reserved and custom bits to zeros.

For security reasons, the interface guarantees that secret `entropy`
words are not made available multiple times. Hence polling (reading) must
also have the side effect of clearing (wipe-on-read) the `entropy` contents and
changing the state to `WAIT` (unless there is `entropy`
immediately available for `ES16`). Other states (`BIST`, `WAIT`, and `DEAD`)
may be unaffected by polling.

The Status Bits returned in `seed[31:30]`=`OPST`:

* `00` - `BIST`
indicates that Built-In Self-Test "on-demand" (BIST) testing is being
performed. If `OPST` returns temporarily to `BIST` from any other
state, this signals a non-fatal self-test alarm,
which is non-actionable, apart from being logged.
Such a `BIST` alarm must be latched until polled at least once to enable
software to record its occurence.

* `01` - `WAIT`
means that a sufficient amount of entropy is not yet available. This
is not an error condition and may (in fact) be more frequent than ES16
since physical entropy sources often have low bandwidth.

* `10` - `ES16`
indicates success; the low bits `seed[15:0]` will have 16 bits of
randomness (`entropy`), which is guaranteed to meet certain minimum entropy
requirements, regardless of implementation.

* `11` - `DEAD`
is an unrecoverable self-test error. This may indicate a hardware
fault, a security issue, or (extremely rarely) a type-1 statistical
false positive in the continuous testing procedures. In case of a fatal
failure, an immediate lockdown may also be an appropriate response in
dedicated security devices.

**Example.** `0x8000ABCD` is a valid `ES16` status output, with `0xABCD`
being the `entropy` value. `0xFFFFFFFF` is an invalid output (`DEAD`) with
no `entropy` value.

[[crypto_scalar_es_state,reftext="Entropy Source State Transition Diagram"]]
====
image::es_state.svg[title="Entropy Source state transition diagram.", align="center",scaledwidth=40%]
Normally the operational state alternates between WAIT
(no data) and ES16, which means that 16 bits of randomness (`entropy`)
have been polled. BIST (Built-in Self-Test) only occurs after reset
or to signal a non-fatal self-test alarm (if reached after WAIT or
ES16). DEAD is an unrecoverable error state.
====

[[crypto_scalar_es_req]]
=== Entropy Source Requirements

The output `entropy` (`seed[15:0]` in ES16 state) is not necessarily
fully conditioned randomness due to hardware and energy limitations
of smaller, low-powered implementations. However, minimum requirements are
defined. The main requirement is that 2-to-1 cryptographic post-processing
in 256-bit input blocks will yield 128-bit "full entropy" output blocks.
Entropy source users may make this conservative assumption but are not
prohibited from using more than twice the number of seed bits relative
to the desired resulting entropy.

An implementation of the entropy source should meet at least one of the
following requirements sets in order to be considered a secure and
safe design:

*	<<crypto_scalar_es_req_90b>>: A physical entropy source meeting
	NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] criteria with evaluated min-entropy
	of 192 bits for each 256 output bits (min-entropy rate 0.75).

*	<<crypto_scalar_es_req_ptg2>>: A physical entropy source meeting the
	AIS-31 PTG.2 cite:[KiSc11] criteria, implying average Shannon entropy
	rate 0.997. The source must also meet the NIST 800-90B 
	min-entropy rate 192/256 = 0.75.
	
*	<<crypto_scalar_es_req_virt>>: A virtual entropy source is a DRBG
	seeded from a physical entropy source. It must have at least a
	256-bit (Post-Quantum Category 5) internal security level.

All implementations must signal initialization, test mode, and health
alarms as required by respective standards. This may require the implementer
to add non-standard (custom) test interfaces in a secure and safe manner,
an example of which is described in <<crypto_scalar_es_getnoise>>


[[crypto_scalar_es_req_90b]]
==== NIST SP 800-90B / FIPS 140-3 Requirements

All NIST SP 800-90B cite:[TuBaKe:18] required components and heath test 
mechanisms must be implemented. 

The entropy requirement is satisfied if 128 bits of _full entropy_ can be
obtained from each 256-bit (16*16 -bit) successful, but possibly
non-consecutive `entropy` (ES16) output sequence using a vetted conditioning
algorithm such as a cryptographic hash
(See Section 3.1.5.1.2, SP 800-90B). In practice, a min-entropy
rate of 0.75 or larger is required for this. 

Note that 128 bits of estimated input min-entropy does not yield 128 bits of 
conditioned, full entropy in SP 800-90B/C evaluation. Instead, the
implication is that every 256-bit sequence should have min-entropy of at
least 128+64 = 192 bits, as discussed in SP 800-90C cite:[BaKeRo:21];
the likelihood of successfully "guessing" an individual 256-bit output
sequence should not be higher than 2^-192^ even with (almost)
unconstrained amount of entropy source data and computational power.

Rather than attempting to define all the mathematical and architectural
properties that the entropy source must satisfy, we define that the physical
entropy source be strong and robust enough to pass the equivalent of
NIST SP 800-90 evaluation and certification for full entropy when
conditioned cryptographically in ratio 2:1 with 128-bit output blocks.

Even though the requirement is defined in terms of 128-bit full entropy
blocks, we recommend 256-bit security. This can be accomplished by using
at least 512 `entropy` bits to initialize a DRBG that has 256-bit security.

[[crypto_scalar_es_req_ptg2]]
==== BSI AIS-31 PTG.2 / Common Criteria Requirements

For alternative Common Criteria certification (or self-certification), 
AIS 31 PTG.2 class cite:[KiSc11] (Sect. 4.3.) required hardware components
and mechanisms must be implemented.
In addition to AIS-31 PTG.2 randomness requirements (Shannon entropy rate of
0.997 as evaluated in that standard), the overall min-entropy requirement of
remains, as discussed in <<crypto_scalar_es_req_90b>>. Note that 800-90B
min-entropy can be significantly lower than AIS-31 Shannon entropy. These
two metrics should not be equated or confused with each other.


[[crypto_scalar_es_req_virt]]
==== Virtual Sources: Security Requirement

NOTE: A virtual source is not an ISA compliance requirement. It is defined
for the benefit of the RISC-V security ecosystem so that virtual systems
may have a consistent level of security.

A virtual source is not a physical entropy source but provides
additional protection against covert channels, depletion attacks, and host
identification in operating environments that can not be entirely trusted
with direct access to a hardware resource. Despite limited trust,
implementors should try to guarantee that even such environments have
sufficient entropy available for secure cryptographic operations.

A virtual source traps access to the `seed` CSR, emulates it, or
otherwise implements it without direct access to a physical entropy
source. The output can be cryptographically secure pseudorandomness
instead of real entropy, but must have at least 256-bit security, as defined
below. A virtual source is intended especially for guest operating
systems, sandboxes, emulators, and similar use cases.

As a technical definition, a random-distinguishing attack against
the output should require computational resources comparable or greater
than those required for exhaustive key search on a secure block cipher
with a 256-bit key (e.g., AES 256). This applies to both classical
and quantum computing models, but only classical information flows.
The virtual source security requirement maps to Post-Quantum Security
Category 5 cite:[NI16], so that virtual sources can be used for cryptography.

Any implementation of the `seed` CSR that limits the security
strength shall not reduce it to less than 256 bits. If the security
level is under 256 bits, then the interface must not be available.

A virtual entropy source does not need to implement `WAIT` or `BIST` states.
It should fail (`DEAD`) if the host DRBG or entropy source fails and
there is insufficient seeding material for the host DRBG.


[[crypto_scalar_es_access]]
=== Access Control to `seed`

The `seed` CSR is by default only available in M mode, but can be made
available to other modes via the `mseccfg.sseed` and `mseccfg.useed`
access control bits. `sseed` is bit `9` of and `useed` is
bit `8` of the `mseccfg` CSR.
Without the corresponding access control bit set to 1,
an attempted read or write access to `seed` from `U`, `S`, or
other non-`M` modes will raise an Illegal Instruction Exception.

.Entropy Source Access Control.

[cols="1,1,1,7",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Mode | `sseed` | `useed` | Description

| `M`
| `*`
| `*`
| The `seed` CSR is always available in machine mode as normal (with a
CSR read-write instruction. Attempted read without a write raises an
Illegal Instruction Exception regardless of mode access control bits).

| `S/HS/VS`
| `0`
| `*`
| Any `seed` CSR access raises an Illegal Instruction Exception.

| `S/HS/VS`
| `1`
| `*`
| The `seed` CSR is accessible as normal. No exception is raised for read-write.

| `U/VU`
| `*`
| `0`
| Any `seed` CSR access raises an Illegal Instruction Exception.

| `U/VU`
| `*`
| `1`
| The `seed` CSR is accessible as normal. No exception is raised for read-write.

|=======================================================================

M-mode can trap attempted access to `seed` and feed a
less privileged guest _virtual entropy source_ data 
(<<crypto_scalar_es_req_virt>>) instead of invoking an SP 800-90B 
(<<crypto_scalar_es_req_90b>>) or PTG.2 (<<crypto_scalar_es_req_ptg2>>)
_physical entropy source_. Output generation is made with an appropriately
seeded software DRBG. Systems should implement carefully considered access
control policies from  lower privilege modes to physical entropy sources.
See  <<crypto_scalar_appx_es_access>> for security considerations related
to direct access to entropy sources.

Note that additional modes such as `HS`, `VS`, and `VU` are present
in systems with Hypervisor (H) extension implemented. Without additional
hardware access control mechanisms, direct access from all of these to the
physical source is controlled via `mseccfg.sseed` and `mseccfg.useed.`

Implementations may implement `mseccfg` such that `[s,u]seed` is a read-only
constant value `0`. Software may discover if access to the `seed` CSR can be
enabled in `U` and `S` mode by writing a `1` to `[s,u]seed` and reading back
the result.

If `S` or `U` mode is not implemented, then the corresponding `[s,u]seed`
bits of `mseccfg` must be hardwired to zero.
The `[s,u]seed` bits must have a defined reset value. The system
must not allow them to be in an undefined state after a reset.
`mseccfg` exists if `Zkr` is implemented, or if it is required by other
processor features. If `Zkr` is _not_ implemented, the `[s,u]seed` bits must
be hardwired to zero.
