tests/compliance/test-plan-scalar.adoc, before:


= RISC-V Scalar Crypto: Compliance Test Plan
Ben Marshall <ben.marshall@bristol.ac.uk>
:toc:

A plan for developing the riscv-compliance tests for the Scalar Crypto
Extension.

== Introduction

The point of this test plan is to:

* Explain what the riscv-compliance tests try to achieve, both generally
  and for the scalar crypto instructions in particular.

* List the kinds of coverage that the compliance tests try to meet, and to
  explain more and less important coverage cases for different kinds of
  instruction.

* Act as a starting point for verification engineers writing
  verification plans. It describes real-world usage patterns of the
  instructions which constrained random stimulus generation flows can focus
  on.

Some useful links:

* https://github.com/riscv/riscv-compliance[RISC-V Compliance Github Repo].
** https://github.com/riscv/riscv-compliance/tree/master/doc[Associated Documentation].
* https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases[Latest Scalar Crypto Spec Release].
** https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/tree/master/tests/compliance[WIP Compliance tests for scalar crypto].

== Stimulus Patterns

Some simple stimulus patterns described here and referred too later
when talking about individual instructions.

* `single-bit-1` - Each source register input has a single bit set.
  Test for all bits `0<=i<XLEN`. Likewise, have `single-bit-0`.

* `uniform-random` - Each source register input is a uniform random number,
  `XLEN`-bits long.

* `byte-count` - Each source register input is divided into bytes, and each
   byte is incremented individually, starting at zero. Hence, for RV32,
   the first two input patterns would be `0x03020100` and `0x07060504`.

== Coverage Points

These are coverage points relevant for single instructions,
and act as a *bare minimum* standard to hit for every instruction.

=== Register addresses

* Have all values of `rd`, `rs1` and `rs2` been covered where applicable?

* Have we seen:
  
** `rd==rs1`, `rd!=rs1`

** `rd==rs2`, `rd!=rs2`

** `rs1==rs2`, `rs1!=rs2`

=== Immediates

* The immediates for all of the scalar crypto instructions are either
  `2` or `4` bits, so we should aim for complete coverage of these.

=== Input values

* Have we seen every bit *set*   for each register input?

* Have we seen every bit *clear* for each register input?

* For instructions with an SBox (AES,SM4), do we have complete input
  coverage for each input to the SBox? For all instructions, this is
  just `0..255` for each input byte.

=== Cross Coverage

No intra or inter instruction cross coverage is defined yet.
Some cross coverage is implicitly discussed in real world usage
patterns described below.

== RV32 Instructions

The RV32 instructions have been put into groups of instructions which
are similar from a coverage and stimulus perspective.

=== AES and SM4

    aes32dsi    rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    aes32dsmi   rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    aes32esi    rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    aes32esmi   rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    sm4ed       rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    sm4ks       rd, rs1, rs2, bs

All of these instructions have the same basic input patterns, and apply
an SBox to a single byte of `rs2`.
The `bs` immediate is `2` bits, and is used to select a byte of `rs2`
for further processing.

* Test pattern 1: SBox Testing
  
** This uses the `byte-count` pattern described above.

** Generate a 256-byte sequence `0..255` and pack the sequence into
   32-bit words.

** Each word in the sequence is the `rs2` input. The `rs1` input
   is set to zero so we do not alter the SBox output value.

** For each input word, generate `4` instructions, with `bs=0..3`.
   This will mean that every possible SBox input pattern is tested.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform Random

** Generate uniform random values for `rs1`, `rs2` and `bs`.

** Let register values be un-constrained: `0..31`.

** Repeat `N` times for each instruction until sufficient coverage is
   reached.

* Test pattern 3: real-world patterns:

** Execute `4` of each instruction adjacently. Each instruction has
   the same `rd` and `rs1` value, a different `rs2` and a different
   `bs` value. This mimics how the instructions will appear in real-world
   code, and tests things like pipeline forwarding.

NOTE: These instructions are un-likely to appear interleaved with one
another, so this pattern is left out for now. Forwarding between
like-instructions is much more common.


=== SHA2-256 and SM3

    sha256sig0  rd, rs1
    sha256sig1  rd, rs1
    sha256sum0  rd, rs1
    sha256sum1  rd, rs1
    sm3p0       rd, rs1
    sm3p1       rd, rs1

These instructions are all designed to accelerate hash functions, and
essentially perform rotations and/or shifts of `rs1` by several different
constants, before xor'ing the results together.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** For each instruction, generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage.

** Check forwarding result of `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add`
   instruction into these instructions.

** Check forwarding result of these instructions into
   `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add` instructions.

** Check load-to-use hazard into these instructions.

** Check forwarding of these instructions into `rs1` of `sw` instruction.

=== SHA2-512

    sha512sig0h rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sig0l rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sig1h rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sig1l rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sum0r rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sum1r rd, rs1, rs2

These instructions are similar to the SHA2-256 and SM3 instructions.
The `rs1` and `rs2` operands are shifted left/right by several constants,
then xor'd together.

NOTE: The plan for these instructions is identical to the one for
      SHA2-256 and SM3, but with an additional register input to cover.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.
   Do this for each `rs1` and `rs2`.

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.
   Do this for each `rs1` and `rs2`.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** For each instruction, generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs
   for `rs1` and `rs2`.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage.

** Check forwarding result of `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add`
   instruction into these instructions.

** Check forwarding result of these instructions into
   `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add` instructions.

** Check load-to-use hazard into these instructions.

** Check forwarding of these instructions into `rs1` of `sw` instruction.

== RV64 Instructions

The RV64 instructions have been put into groups of instructions which
are similar from a coverage and stimulus perspective.

=== AES: Round instructions

    aes64ds     rd, rs1, rs2
    aes64dsm    rd, rs1, rs2
    aes64es     rd, rs1, rs2
    aes64esm    rd, rs1, rs2

* Test pattern 1: SBox Testing

** This uses the `byte-count` pattern described above.

** Generate a 256-byte sequence `0..255` and pack the sequence into
   64-bit words.

** For each pair of 64-bit words `i` and `j`, where `j=i+1`:

** Execute two of each instruction. One where `rs1=i, rs2=j`, and
   one where `rs1=j` and `rs2=i`. Store the results of each instruction
   to the signature.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform Random Testing

** For `rs1` and `rs2`, generate uniform random values and store the
   results to the signature.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage

** Execute two adjacent instructions of the same type, with:

*** Different destination registers.

*** The first instruction has `rs1=x, rs2=y`, and the second instruction
    has `rs1=y, rs2=x`.

*** This is the most common usage pattern for the instructions.

** Forward the result of an `xor` instruction into the instructions and
   vice-versa.

=== AES: aes64ks1

    aes64ks1i   rd, rs1, rcon

This instruction applies the AES Forward SBox to the low 32-bits
of `rs1`, with an optional rotation and xor depending on `rcon.`
`rcon` is 4-bits wide, with only values `0<=rcon<=0xA` permitted.

* Test pattern 1: SBox coverage

** Uses the `byte-count` pattern described above.

** Generate `64` double-word inputs, such that the low `4` bytes of
   each double-word completely cover the `0..255` SBox input space.

** Execute one instruction per double-word input to get complete SBox
   input coverage.

** The `rcon` immediate should be set to `0xA` for this, to avoid it
   altering the SBox output value and make debugging easier.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform Random testing

** Generate random 64-bit values for `rs1` and random 4-bit values
   for `rcon`, where `0<=rcon<=0xA`. Record each result to the signature.

=== AES: aes64ks2

    aes64ks2    rd, rs1, rs2

This instruction simply performs `xor` operations between high and low
words of `rs1` and `rs2` to produce a result.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** Generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs.

=== SHA2, SM3 and aes64im

    sha256sig0  rd, rs1
    sha256sig1  rd, rs1
    sha256sum0  rd, rs1
    sha256sum1  rd, rs1
    sha512sig0  rd, rs1
    sha512sig1  rd, rs1
    sha512sum0  rd, rs1
    sha512sum1  rd, rs1
    sm3p0       rd, rs1
    sm3p1       rd, rs1
    aes64im     rd, rs1

The SHA256 and SM3 instructions listed here are very similar to the
RV32 SHA and SM3 listed instructions, but with zero extended 32-bit
outputs and they ignore the high 32-bits of their inputs.

The SHA512 instructions are similar to the SHA256 instructions, but work
across the entire 64-bits of the input.

The `aes64im` instruction implements the AES Inverse MixColumn transform
on each 32-bit word of `rs1`.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** Generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage - SHA and SM3

** Check forwarding result of `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add`
   instruction into these instructions.

** Check forwarding result of these instructions into
   `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add` instructions.

** Check load-to-use hazard into these instructions.

** Check forwarding of these instructions into `rs1` of `sw` instruction.

=== SM4

    sm4ed   rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    sm4ks   rd, rs1, rs2, bs

NOTE: These instructions are identical to the RV32 versions, but ignore
the high 32-bits of their register inputs, and zero extend the low
32-bits of their outputs. The same test plan may be used, accounting for
the wider registers.

== pollentropy

CAUTION: This instruction will require special treatment. The quality of
         the entropy source must be tested separately from the
         architectural specification for the sampling state machine.
         What follows is a *discussion* of how compliance for `pollentropy`
         *could* be approached.

NOTE: It is worth having a copy of the 
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases[specification].
ready for this.

`pollentropy` is an instruction which takes no inputs, and writes a
single `XLEN` bit register output.
The output has two fields of interest:

- `status` - A 2-bit field indicating the current status of the entropy
  source. The rest of the output value can only be interpreted based on
  this value.

- `seed` - A 16-bit *random* value, with at-least *8* bits of entropy.
  This field is *only* valid if `status=ES16`. Otherwise software
  *must* ignore it, and hardware *must* zero it.


NOTE: TODO: Discuss valid state transitions for `status`, how to validate the
quality of the entropy. Possible separation of architectural compliance
from entropy measurement. Dedicated tool to check entropy quality.
The spec *mandates* a minimum entropy quality. If people are to
trust the RISC-V entropy source, then people can't use the RISC-V
label without meeting that compliance requirement.

== Other Instructions: Integer & Carry-less multiply

The scalar crypto ISE places additional constraints on instructions
which are present in the base ISA, or Bitmanip standard extension.

    mul     rd, rs1, rs2
    mulhu   rd, rs1, rs2
    clmul   rd, rs1, rs2
    clmulh  rd, rs1, rs2
    clmulr  rd, rs1, rs2

NOTE: Only un-signed integer multiplication instructions are currently
listed. Do we also need to consider signed multiplication?

All of these instructions *must* be constant time with respect to their inputs.
If they are not, they create a (remotely) exploitable timing channel and
are insecure from a cryptographic perspective.
Common micro-architectural performance optimisations for these instructions
include early termination and macro-op fusion.

NOTE: Do we also need to consider operand 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memoization[memoisation]
for multiplication?
Yes: It _does_ introduce a timing channel.
No: That timing channel is _very_ hard to exploit.

* Test pattern 1: Leading Ones

** For each `rs` register input, generate a random `XLEN` input value, and
   set the most-significant `i` bits. See the other `rs` input, pick a
   random value.

** Repeat for values `0<=i<=XLEN`.
   The `i` value can be stepped by a value greater than `1` to manage
   the test size.

* Test pattern 2: Leading Zeros.

** Repeat test pattern 1, but clear the top `i` bits instead.

* Test pattern 3: Trailing Zeros

** Repeat test pattern 1, but clear the least-significant `i` bits instead.

* Test pattern 4: Trailing Ones

** Repeat test pattern 1, but set   the least-significant `i` bits instead.


After executing each test input, the time `rdcycle` instruction is
used to record the amount of time taken to execute the relevant multiply
instruction.
Each execution time is recorded and compared to the previous
measurement.
If the two are not identical, a *fail* code is recorded to the
test signature, along with the inputs which caused the failure.

It may be more accurate to run several multiplication instructions in
sequence, so as to amortise any overhead introduced by `rdcycle`.

CAUTION: Will this give consistent results on modern micro-architectures?
Can we expect `rdcycle` ordering with respect to the multiplies to
be respected?
Chapter 10 of the user-level ISA spec has a long discussion on how
defining a _cycle_ is hard, and offers no guarantees of portability.
Hence, it becomes much easier to identify when multiplication *is not*
constant time (and so insecure), but very hard to portably show that
multiplication *is* constant time.
We do not want to artificially limit the range of possible implementations
due to un-necessesarily restrictive compliance tests.

As well as individual instructions, recommended fusion pairs must also
be tested.
These are:

    mulhu ra, rs1, rs2  // ra != rs1, rs2
    mul   rb, rs1, rs2  // rb != ra, rs1, rs2

and

    clmulh ra, rs1, rs2  // ra != rs1, rs2
    clmul  rb, rs1, rs2  // rb != ra, rs1, rs2

The same set of test patterns can be used, treating `rs1`,`rs2` as a 
single `2*XLEN` input.

Commit message:

compliance: small scalar test plan updates

tests/compliance/test-plan-scalar.adoc, after:


= RISC-V Scalar Crypto: Compliance Test Plan
Ben Marshall <ben.marshall@bristol.ac.uk>
:toc:

A plan for developing the riscv-compliance tests for the Scalar Crypto
Extension.

== Introduction

The point of this test plan is to:

* Explain what the riscv-compliance tests try to achieve, both generally
  and for the scalar crypto instructions in particular.

* List the kinds of coverage that the compliance tests try to meet, and to
  explain more and less important coverage cases for different kinds of
  instruction.

* Act as a starting point for verification engineers writing
  verification plans. It describes real-world usage patterns of the
  instructions which constrained random stimulus generation flows can focus
  on.

Some useful links:

* https://github.com/riscv/riscv-compliance[RISC-V Compliance Github Repo].
** https://github.com/riscv/riscv-compliance/tree/master/doc[Associated Documentation].
* https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases[Latest Scalar Crypto Spec Release].
** https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/tree/master/tests/compliance[WIP Compliance tests for scalar crypto].

== Stimulus Patterns

Some simple stimulus patterns described here and referred too later
when talking about individual instructions.

* `single-bit-1` - Each source register input has a single bit set.
  Test for all bits `0<=i<XLEN`. Likewise, have `single-bit-0`.

* `uniform-random` - Each source register input is a uniform random number,
  `XLEN`-bits long.

* `byte-count` - Each source register input is divided into bytes, and each
   byte is incremented individually, starting at zero. Hence, for RV32,
   the first two input patterns would be `0x03020100` and `0x07060504`.

NOTE: Where some unknown number of test vectors will be needed to hit
coverage, this is usually left as `N`, which can be tuned later.
E.g. "generate `N` uniform random numbers...".

== Coverage Points

These are coverage points relevant for single instructions,
and act as a *bare minimum* standard to hit for every instruction.

=== Register addresses

* Have all values of `rd`, `rs1` and `rs2` been covered where applicable?

* Have we seen:
  
** `rd==rs1`, `rd!=rs1`

** `rd==rs2`, `rd!=rs2`

** `rs1==rs2`, `rs1!=rs2`

=== Immediates

* The immediates for all of the scalar crypto instructions are either
  `2` or `4` bits, so we should aim for complete coverage of these.

=== Input values

* Have we seen every bit *set*   for each register input?

* Have we seen every bit *clear* for each register input?

* For instructions with an SBox (AES,SM4), do we have complete input
  coverage for each input to the SBox? For all instructions, this is
  just `0..255` for each input byte.

=== Cross Coverage

No intra or inter instruction cross coverage is defined yet.
Some cross coverage is implicitly discussed in real world usage
patterns described below.

== RV32 Instructions

The RV32 instructions have been put into groups of instructions which
are similar from a coverage and stimulus perspective.

=== AES and SM4

    aes32dsi    rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    aes32dsmi   rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    aes32esi    rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    aes32esmi   rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    sm4ed       rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    sm4ks       rd, rs1, rs2, bs

All of these instructions have the same basic input patterns, and apply
an SBox to a single byte of `rs2`.
The `bs` immediate is `2` bits, and is used to select a byte of `rs2`
for further processing.

* Test pattern 1: SBox Testing
  
** This uses the `byte-count` pattern described above.

** Generate a 256-byte sequence `0..255` and pack the sequence into
   32-bit words.

** Each word in the sequence is the `rs2` input. The `rs1` input
   is set to zero so we do not alter the SBox output value.

** For each input word, generate `4` instructions, with `bs=0..3`.
   This will mean that every possible SBox input pattern is tested.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform Random

** Generate uniform random values for `rs1`, `rs2` and `bs`.

** Let register values be un-constrained: `0..31`.

** Repeat `N` times for each instruction until sufficient coverage is
   reached.

* Test pattern 3: real-world patterns:

** Execute `4` of each instruction adjacently. Each instruction has
   the same `rd` and `rs1` value, a different `rs2` and a different
   `bs` value. This mimics how the instructions will appear in real-world
   code, and tests things like pipeline forwarding.

NOTE: These instructions are un-likely to appear interleaved with one
another, so this pattern is left out for now. Forwarding between
like-instructions is much more common.


=== SHA2-256 and SM3

    sha256sig0  rd, rs1
    sha256sig1  rd, rs1
    sha256sum0  rd, rs1
    sha256sum1  rd, rs1
    sm3p0       rd, rs1
    sm3p1       rd, rs1

These instructions are all designed to accelerate hash functions, and
essentially perform rotations and/or shifts of `rs1` by several different
constants, before xor'ing the results together.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** For each instruction, generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage.

** Check forwarding result of `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add`
   instruction into these instructions.

** Check forwarding result of these instructions into
   `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add` instructions.

** Check load-to-use hazard into these instructions.

** Check forwarding of these instructions into `rs1` of `sw` instruction.

=== SHA2-512

    sha512sig0h rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sig0l rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sig1h rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sig1l rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sum0r rd, rs1, rs2
    sha512sum1r rd, rs1, rs2

These instructions are similar to the SHA2-256 and SM3 instructions.
The `rs1` and `rs2` operands are shifted left/right by several constants,
then xor'd together.

NOTE: The plan for these instructions is identical to the one for
      SHA2-256 and SM3, but with an additional register input to cover.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.
   Do this for each `rs1` and `rs2`.

** For each instruction, generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.
   Do this for each `rs1` and `rs2`.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** For each instruction, generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs
   for `rs1` and `rs2`.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage.

** Check forwarding result of `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add`
   instruction into these instructions.

** Check forwarding result of these instructions into
   `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add` instructions.

** Check load-to-use hazard into these instructions.

** Check forwarding of these instructions into `rs1` of `sw` instruction.

== RV64 Instructions

The RV64 instructions have been put into groups of instructions which
are similar from a coverage and stimulus perspective.

=== AES: Round instructions

    aes64ds     rd, rs1, rs2
    aes64dsm    rd, rs1, rs2
    aes64es     rd, rs1, rs2
    aes64esm    rd, rs1, rs2

* Test pattern 1: SBox Testing

** This uses the `byte-count` pattern described above.

** Generate a 256-byte sequence `0..255` and pack the sequence into
   64-bit words.

** For each pair of 64-bit words `i` and `j`, where `j=i+1`:

** Execute two of each instruction. One where `rs1=i, rs2=j`, and
   one where `rs1=j` and `rs2=i`. Store the results of each instruction
   to the signature.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform Random Testing

** For `rs1` and `rs2`, generate uniform random values and store the
   results to the signature.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage

** Execute two adjacent instructions of the same type, with:

*** Different destination registers.

*** The first instruction has `rs1=x, rs2=y`, and the second instruction
    has `rs1=y, rs2=x`.

*** This is the most common usage pattern for the instructions.

** Forward the result of an `xor` instruction into the instructions and
   vice-versa.

=== AES: aes64ks1

    aes64ks1i   rd, rs1, rcon

This instruction applies the AES Forward SBox to the low 32-bits
of `rs1`, with an optional rotation and xor depending on `rcon.`
`rcon` is 4-bits wide, with only values `0<=rcon<=0xA` permitted.

* Test pattern 1: SBox coverage

** Uses the `byte-count` pattern described above.

** Generate `64` double-word inputs, such that the low `4` bytes of
   each double-word completely cover the `0..255` SBox input space.

** Execute one instruction per double-word input to get complete SBox
   input coverage.

** The `rcon` immediate should be set to `0xA` for this, to avoid it
   altering the SBox output value and make debugging easier.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform Random testing

** Generate random 64-bit values for `rs1` and random 4-bit values
   for `rcon`, where `0<=rcon<=0xA`. Record each result to the signature.

=== AES: aes64ks2

    aes64ks2    rd, rs1, rs2

This instruction simply performs `xor` operations between high and low
words of `rs1` and `rs2` to produce a result.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** Generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs.

=== SHA2, SM3 and aes64im

    sha256sig0  rd, rs1
    sha256sig1  rd, rs1
    sha256sum0  rd, rs1
    sha256sum1  rd, rs1
    sha512sig0  rd, rs1
    sha512sig1  rd, rs1
    sha512sum0  rd, rs1
    sha512sum1  rd, rs1
    sm3p0       rd, rs1
    sm3p1       rd, rs1
    aes64im     rd, rs1

The SHA256 and SM3 instructions listed here are very similar to the
RV32 SHA and SM3 listed instructions, but with zero extended 32-bit
outputs and they ignore the high 32-bits of their inputs.

The SHA512 instructions are similar to the SHA256 instructions, but work
across the entire 64-bits of the input.

The `aes64im` instruction implements the AES Inverse MixColumn transform
on each 32-bit word of `rs1`.

* Test pattern 1: Single bit testing

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit set.

** Generate `XLEN` inputs with a single bit clear.

* Test pattern 2: Uniform random.

** Generate `N` `XLEN` bit uniform random inputs.

* Test pattern 3: Real-world usage - SHA and SM3

** Check forwarding result of `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add`
   instruction into these instructions.

** Check forwarding result of these instructions into
   `add`/`xor`/`not`/`andn`/`add` instructions.

** Check load-to-use hazard into these instructions.

** Check forwarding of these instructions into `rs1` of `sw` instruction.

=== SM4

    sm4ed   rd, rs1, rs2, bs
    sm4ks   rd, rs1, rs2, bs

NOTE: These instructions are identical to the RV32 versions, but ignore
the high 32-bits of their register inputs, and zero extend the low
32-bits of their outputs. The same test plan may be used, accounting for
the wider registers.

== pollentropy

CAUTION: This instruction will require special treatment. The quality of
         the entropy source must be tested separately from the
         architectural specification for the sampling state machine.
         What follows is a *discussion* of how compliance for `pollentropy`
         *could* be approached.

NOTE: It is worth having a copy of the 
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases[specification]
ready for this.

`pollentropy` is an instruction which takes no inputs, and writes a
single `XLEN` bit register output.
The output has two fields of interest:

- `status` - A 2-bit field indicating the current status of the entropy
  source. The rest of the output value can only be interpreted based on
  this value.

- `seed` - A 16-bit *random* value, with at-least *8* bits of entropy.
  This field is *only* valid if `status=ES16`. Otherwise software
  *must* ignore it, and hardware *must* zero it.


Basic Architectural Test cases:

* `pollentropy` raises an illegal instruction exception if executed in
  anything other than Machine Mode.


NOTE: TODO: Discuss valid state transitions for `status`, how to validate the
quality of the entropy. Possible separation of architectural compliance
from entropy measurement. Dedicated tool to check entropy quality.
The spec *mandates* a minimum entropy quality. If people are to
trust the RISC-V entropy source, then people can't use the RISC-V
label without meeting that compliance requirement.

== Other Instructions: Integer & Carry-less multiply

The scalar crypto ISE places additional constraints on instructions
which are present in the base ISA, or Bitmanip standard extension.

    mul     rd, rs1, rs2
    mulhu   rd, rs1, rs2
    clmul   rd, rs1, rs2
    clmulh  rd, rs1, rs2
    clmulr  rd, rs1, rs2

NOTE: Only un-signed integer multiplication instructions are currently
listed. Do we also need to consider signed multiplication?

All of these instructions *must* be constant time with respect to their inputs.
If they are not, they create a (remotely) exploitable timing channel and
are insecure from a cryptographic perspective.
Common micro-architectural performance optimisations for these instructions
include early termination and macro-op fusion.

NOTE: Do we also need to consider operand 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memoization[memoisation]
for multiplication?
Yes: It _does_ introduce a timing channel.
No: That timing channel is _very_ hard to exploit.

* Test pattern 1: Leading Ones

** For each `rs` register input, generate a random `XLEN` input value, and
   set the most-significant `i` bits. See the other `rs` input, pick a
   random value.

** Repeat for values `0<=i<=XLEN`.
   The `i` value can be stepped by a value greater than `1` to manage
   the test size.

* Test pattern 2: Leading Zeros.

** Repeat test pattern 1, but clear the top `i` bits instead.

* Test pattern 3: Trailing Zeros

** Repeat test pattern 1, but clear the least-significant `i` bits instead.

* Test pattern 4: Trailing Ones

** Repeat test pattern 1, but set   the least-significant `i` bits instead.


After executing each test input, the time `rdcycle` instruction is
used to record the amount of time taken to execute the relevant multiply
instruction.
Each execution time is recorded and compared to the previous
measurement.
If the two are not identical, a *fail* code is recorded to the
test signature, along with the inputs which caused the failure.

It may be more accurate to run several multiplication instructions in
sequence, so as to amortise any overhead introduced by `rdcycle`.

CAUTION: Will this give consistent results on modern micro-architectures?
Can we expect `rdcycle` ordering with respect to the multiplies to
be respected?
Chapter 10 of the user-level ISA spec has a long discussion on how
defining a _cycle_ is hard, and offers no guarantees of portability.
Hence, it becomes much easier to identify when multiplication *is not*
constant time (and so insecure), but very hard to portably show that
multiplication *is* constant time.
We do not want to artificially limit the range of possible implementations
due to un-necessesarily restrictive compliance tests.

As well as individual instructions, recommended fusion pairs must also
be tested.
These are:

    mulhu ra, rs1, rs2  // ra != rs1, rs2
    mul   rb, rs1, rs2  // rb != ra, rs1, rs2

and

    clmulh ra, rs1, rs2  // ra != rs1, rs2
    clmul  rb, rs1, rs2  // rb != ra, rs1, rs2

The same set of test patterns can be used, treating `rs1`,`rs2` as a 
single `2*XLEN` input.
