doc/vector/insns/vaesem.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaesem, Vector AES encrypt middle round]]
= vaesem.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES middle-round encryption

Mnemonic::
vaesem.vv vd, vs2 +
vaesem.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00010'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00010'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32
* Only for the `.vs` form: the `vd` register group overlaps the `vs2` scalar element group


Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description::
A middle-round encryption function of the AES block cipher is performed.

In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, `vs2` holds a
scalar element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in register group `vd`.

The inputs and outputs to this instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each `EGW=128` element group of source `vd` holds the current round state and each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` holds the round key.

Each `EGW=128` element group new round state output is produced by applying the InvShiftRows, InvSubBytes, AddRoundkey and InvMixColumns steps to the corresponding inputs.  

- SubBytes(state)
- ShiftRows(state)
- MixColumns(state)
- AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)

// This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
// on the data being operated upon.
//
// The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
// `vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
// therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
// Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESEM(vs2, vd, suffix)) = {
  if( ((vl%EGS)<>0) | ((vstart%EGS)<>0))  then {
    handle_illegal();  // illegal instruction exception
    RETIRE_SUCCESS
  } else {

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_fwd(state);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_fwd(sb);
    let mix   : bits(128) = aes_fwd_mixcolumns_fwd(sr);
    let ark   : bits(128) = mix ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, ark);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
  }
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

The simplification of instruction descriptions has begun.
Also, fixed typos.

doc/vector/insns/vaesem.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaesem, Vector AES encrypt middle round]]
= vaesem.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES middle-round encryption

Mnemonic::
vaesem.vv vd, vs2 +
vaesem.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00010'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00010'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32
* Only for the `.vs` form: the `vd` register group overlaps the `vs2` scalar element group


Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description::
A middle-round encryption function of the AES block cipher is performed.

The SubBytes, ShiftRows, and MixColumns steps are applied to each round state element group from `vd`.
This is then XOed with the corresponding round key element group in `vs2` (vector-vector
form) or the scalar element group in `vs2` (vector-scalar form).

// This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
// on the data being operated upon.
//
// The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
// `vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
// therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
// Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESEM(vs2, vd, suffix)) = {
  if( ((vl%EGS)<>0) | ((vstart%EGS)<>0))  then {
    handle_illegal();  // illegal instruction exception
    RETIRE_SUCCESS
  } else {

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_fwd(state);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_fwd(sb);
    let mix   : bits(128) = aes_fwd_mixcolumns_fwd(sr);
    let ark   : bits(128) = mix ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, ark);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
  }
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
