doc/vector/insns/vaeskf2.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaeskf2, Vector AES-256 Forward KeySchedule]]
= vaeskf2.vi

Synopsis::
Vector AES-256 Forward KeySchedule

Mnemonic::
vaeskf2.vi vd, vs2, uimm

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd   | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Previous Round key
| uimm | input  | -    | - | -  | Round Number (rnd)
| Vs2  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current Round key
| Vd   | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Next round key
|===

Description:: 
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

This instruction implements a single round of the forward AES-256 KeySchedule.
It treats each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` as the current AES round key,
and each `EGW=128` element group of `vd` as the previous AES round key.
The round number is stored in the unsigned 5-bit `rnd` immediate. Legal values are 2 - 14.
Out of range values signal an illegal instruction exception.

It applies a single AES-256 KeySchedule round to each element group, and
writes the 128-bit result to the corresponding element group in `vd`.

This instruction only returns the generated key to the same element group as the source.
If it is desired to have the same key in all vector groups, either the input vector groups
need to contain the same values, or the output from a particular group needs to be "broadcast"
to the other groups using an instruction such as vrgather.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not
depend on the data being operated upon. 

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[NOTE]
====
The AES-256 KeySchedule uses 8 32-bit words to compute the next 4 32-bit
words of the KeySchedule, while the round function consumes these words
in chunks of 128-bits.
====
Operation::
[source,Sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESESKF2(rnd, vd, vs2)) = {
 if((unsigned(rnd[3:0]) < 2) |  (unsigned(rnd[3:0]) > 14)) then {
    handle_illegal();  RETIRE_SUCCESS
  } else {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)

  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
      let CurrentRoundKey[3:0]  : bits(32)  = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i);
      let RoundKeyB[3:0] : bits(32)  = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i); // Previous round key

      let w[3] : bits(32) = if (rnd[0]==1) then
        RoundKeyB[3] XOR aes_subword_fwd(CurrentRoundKey[0])
      else
        RoundKeyB[3] XOR aes_subword_fwd(aes_rotword(CurrentRoundKey[0])) XOR aes_decode_rcon(rnd>>1);
      w[2] : bits(32) = w[3] XOR RoundKeyB[2]
      w[1] : bits(32) = w[2] XOR RoundKeyB[1]
      w[0] : bits(32) = w[1] XOR RoundKeyB[0]
      set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, w[3:0]);
    }
    RETIRE_SUCCESS
  }
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Removed exceptions on out of range immediates; mapped to in-range values
vaeskf1 - made all immediates defined; out of trange mapped into range
vaeskf2 - made all immediates defined; out of trange mapped into range
vsm4k - all 3-bit immediates are valid; clarified text

doc/vector/insns/vaeskf2.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaeskf2, Vector AES-256 Forward KeySchedule]]
= vaeskf2.vi

Synopsis::
Vector AES-256 Forward KeySchedule

Mnemonic::
vaeskf2.vi vd, vs2, uimm

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd   | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Previous Round key
| uimm | input  | -    | - | -  | Round Number (rnd)
| Vs2  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current Round key
| Vd   | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Next round key
|===

Description:: 
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

This instruction implements a single round of the forward AES-256 KeySchedule.
It treats each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` as the current AES round key,
and each `EGW=128` element group of `vd` as the previous AES round key.
The round number, which ranges from 2 to 14, comes from `uimm[3:0]`;
`uimm[4]` is ignored.
The out-of-range `uimm[3:0]` values of 0-1 and 15 are dealt with by
inverting `uimm[3]`. Thus, 0-1 maps to 8-9, and 15 maps to 7.

This instruction performs a single AES-256 KeySchedule round on each element group, and
writes the 128-bit result to the corresponding element group in `vd`.

This instruction only returns the generated key to the same element group as the source.
If it is desired to have the same key in all vector groups, either the input vector groups
need to contain the same values, or the output from a particular group needs to be "broadcast"
to the other groups using an instruction such as vrgather.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not
depend on the data being operated upon. 

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[NOTE]
====
The AES-256 KeySchedule uses 8 32-bit words to compute the next 4 32-bit
words of the KeySchedule, while the round function consumes these words
in chunks of 128-bits.
====
Operation::
[source,Sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESESKF2(rnd, vd, vs2)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

 // project out-of-range immediates into in-range values
 if((unsigned(rnd[3:0]) < 2) |  (unsigned(rnd[3:0]) > 14)) then rnd[3] = ~rnd[3]

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)

  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
      let CurrentRoundKey[3:0]  : bits(32)  = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i);
      let RoundKeyB[3:0] : bits(32)  = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i); // Previous round key

      let w[3] : bits(32) = if (rnd[0]==1) then
        RoundKeyB[3] XOR aes_subword_fwd(CurrentRoundKey[0])
      else
        RoundKeyB[3] XOR aes_subword_fwd(aes_rotword(CurrentRoundKey[0])) XOR aes_decode_rcon(rnd>>1);
      w[2] : bits(32) = w[3] XOR RoundKeyB[2]
      w[1] : bits(32) = w[2] XOR RoundKeyB[1]
      w[0] : bits(32) = w[1] XOR RoundKeyB[0]
      set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, w[3:0]);
    }
    RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
