doc/vector/insns/vaesef.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaesef, Vector AES encrypt final round]]
= vaesef.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES final round encryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesef.vv vd, vs2 +
vaesef.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00011'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00011'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001'},
]}
....
Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round key 
| vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description:: 
This instruction implements the final-round encryption function of the AES block cipher.

In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group; the instruction encoding is reserved if the `vd` register group overlaps with `vs2`. 

The inputs and outputs to this
instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each element group of source `vs2` holds the current round state
and each 128-bit element group of `vs2` holds the round key.
In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group. 
The next round state output of each element group is produced by applying the SubBytes, ShiftRows, and AddRoundkey
steps to the corresponding inputs and is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not
depend on the data being operated upon.    

* SubBytes(state)
* ShiftRows(state)
* AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

This instruction ignores `vtype.vsew`. +
The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `EEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 


Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESEF(vs2, vd, suffix) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_fwd(state);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_fwd(sb);
    let ark   : bits(128) = sr ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, ark);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Updated instructions so that they depend on SEW
Until now, most cryptographic instructions ignored SEW and operated on their defined EEW. This didn't seem to add any benefit, so the additional complexity that it imposed was not justifiable.

doc/vector/insns/vaesef.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaesef, Vector AES encrypt final round]]
= vaesef.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES final round encryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesef.vv vd, vs2 +
vaesef.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00011'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00011'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001'},
]}
....
Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|SEW
|Definition

| vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round key 
| vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description:: 
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

This instruction implements the final-round encryption function of the AES block cipher.

In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group; the instruction encoding is reserved if the `vd` register group overlaps with `vs2`. 

The inputs and outputs to this
instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each element group of source `vs2` holds the current round state
and each 128-bit element group of `vs2` holds the round key.
In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group. 
The next round state output of each element group is produced by applying the SubBytes, ShiftRows, and AddRoundkey
steps to the corresponding inputs and is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not
depend on the data being operated upon.    

* SubBytes(state)
* ShiftRows(state)
* AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. 


Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESEF(vs2, vd, suffix) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_fwd(state);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_fwd(sb);
    let ark   : bits(128) = sr ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, ark);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
