doc/vector/insns/vaeskf1.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaeskf1, Vector AES-128 Forward KeySchedule]]
= vaeskf1.vi

Synopsis::
Vector AES-128 Forward KeySchedule

Mnemonic::
vaeskf1.vi vd, vs2, uimm

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '100010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| uimm | input  | -    | - | -  | Round Number (rnd)
| Vs2  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current round key
| Vd   | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Next round key
|===

Description:: 
This instruction implements a single round of the forward AES-128 KeySchedule.
It treats each 128-bit element group of `vs2` as the current AES round key.
The round number is stored in the unsigned 5-bit `rnd` immediate. Legal values are 1 - 10.
Out of range values signal an illegal instruction exception.

It applies a single AES-128 KeySchedule round to each element group, and
writes the 128-bit result to the corresponding element group in `vd`.

This instruction ignores `vtype.vsew`. +
The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `EEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`


Operation::
[source,Sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESESKF1(rnd, vd, vs2)) = {
 if(unsigned(rnd[3:0]) > 10) then {
    handle_illegal();  RETIRE_SUCCESS
  } else {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)

  let r : bits(4) = rnd-1;

  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
      let CurrentRoundKey[3:0]  : bits(32)  = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i);
      let w[3] : bits(32) =  CurrentRoundKey[3] XOR aes_subword_fwd(aes_rotword(CurrentRoundKey[0])) XOR
        aes_decode_rcon(r);
      let w[2] : bits(32) = w[3] XOR CurrentRoundKey[2]
      let w[1] : bits(32) = w[2] XOR CurrentRoundKey[1]
      let w[0] : bits(32) = w[1] XOR CurrentRoundKey[0]
      set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, w[3:0]);
    }
    RETIRE_SUCCESS
  }
}


--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Updated AES instructions to be more consistent
Clarified the overlap restrictions for the .vs instructions. Removed non-normative mentions of this requirement.
Put the data independent latency requirements in a common location.

doc/vector/insns/vaeskf1.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaeskf1, Vector AES-128 Forward KeySchedule]]
= vaeskf1.vi

Synopsis::
Vector AES-128 Forward KeySchedule

Mnemonic::
vaeskf1.vi vd, vs2, uimm

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '100010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| uimm | input  | -    | - | -  | Round Number (rnd)
| Vs2  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current round key
| Vd   | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Next round key
|===

Description:: 
This instruction implements a single round of the forward AES-128 KeySchedule.
It treats each 128-bit element group of `vs2` as the current AES round key.
The round number is stored in the unsigned 5-bit `rnd` immediate. Legal values are 1 - 10.
Out of range values signal an illegal instruction exception.

It applies a single AES-128 KeySchedule round to each element group, and
writes the 128-bit result to the corresponding element group in `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not
depend on the data being operated upon. 

This instruction ignores `vtype.vsew`. +
The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `EEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`


Operation::
[source,Sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESESKF1(rnd, vd, vs2)) = {
 if(unsigned(rnd[3:0]) > 10) then {
    handle_illegal();  RETIRE_SUCCESS
  } else {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)

  let r : bits(4) = rnd-1;

  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
      let CurrentRoundKey[3:0]  : bits(32)  = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i);
      let w[3] : bits(32) =  CurrentRoundKey[3] XOR aes_subword_fwd(aes_rotword(CurrentRoundKey[0])) XOR
        aes_decode_rcon(r);
      let w[2] : bits(32) = w[3] XOR CurrentRoundKey[2]
      let w[1] : bits(32) = w[2] XOR CurrentRoundKey[1]
      let w[0] : bits(32) = w[1] XOR CurrentRoundKey[0]
      set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, w[3:0]);
    }
    RETIRE_SUCCESS
  }
}


--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
