doc/vector/insns/vaesd256.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaesd256, Vector AES-256 decrypt all-rounds]]
= vaesd256.v

Synopsis::
Vector AES-256 all rounds decryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesd256.v vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding (Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'func3'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm=0'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Cipher text
| Vs1 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Penultimate Round key
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Final Round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Plain text 
|===

Description:: 
This instruction implements the entire AES-256 block cipher decryption
function. Starting with the final two round keys, It generates each of the previous round keys and performs each of the rounds.

It treats each `EGW=128` element group of `vd` as the plaintext
and concatenates `EGW=128` element groups of `vs1` and `vs2` as the 256-bit encryption key.

The result (i.e. the ciphertext) is written to `EGW=128` element groups of `vd`.

This instruction operates on element groups in the source and destination registers:

- Element Group Width (EGW) = 128 bits
- Effective Element Width (EEW) = 32 bits
- Element Group Size (EGS) = 4 elements

This instruction requires that: +

- `Zvl128b` be implemented (i.e `VLEN>=128`).
- `vl` is an integral multiple of `EGS`
- `vstart` is an integral multiple of `EGS`

This instruction ignores`SEW`



Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAES256E(vs1, vs2, vd,)) = {
  assert(VLEN>=128);
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS
  elementgroups = (vl/EGS)
  egstart = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from egstart to elementgroups) {
    state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    ekey  : bits(256) = get_velem(vs1, EGW=128, i) @
                        get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i) ;
    rkey  : bits(128) = ekey[127..0];
    state = state ^ rkey;
    foreach(r from 1 to 14) {
      state = aes_inv_shift_rows(state);
      state = aes_inv_sub_bytes(state);
      state = state ^ rkey;
      state = aes_inv_mix_columns(state);
      rkey  = aes_256_reverse_key_schedule(r,ekey);
      ekey  = rkey @ ekey[256..128];
    }
    state = aes_inv_shift_rows(state);
    state = aes_inv_sub_bytes(state);
    state = state ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, state);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvknf>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Added vector-scalar form to AES and SM4 Fixed major/minor opcode on instructions as well as sense of vm bit

doc/vector/insns/vaesd256.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaesd256, Vector AES-256 decrypt all-rounds]]
= vaesd256

Synopsis::
Vector AES-256 all rounds decryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesd256.vv vd, vs2, vs1 +
vaesd256.vs vd, vs2, vs1 

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm=1'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Cipher text
| Vs1 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Penultimate Round key
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Final Round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Plain text 
|===

Note::
This instruction does not support a vector-scalar form where the round keys are provided as scalars because it uses two
registers to hold the final two 128-bit round keys.

Description:: 
This instruction implements the entire AES-256 block cipher decryption
function. Starting with the final two round keys, It internally generates each of the previous round keys and performs each of the rounds.

It treats each `EGW=128` element group of `vd` as the plaintext
and concatenates `EGW=128` element groups of `vs1` and `vs2` as the 256-bit encryption key.

The result (i.e. the ciphertext) is written to `EGW=128` element groups of `vd`.

This instruction operates on element groups in the source and destination registers:

- Element Group Width (EGW) = 128 bits
- Effective Element Width (EEW) = 32 bits
- Element Group Size (EGS) = 4 elements

This instruction requires that: +

- `Zvl128b` be implemented (i.e `VLEN>=128`).
- `vl` is an integral multiple of `EGS`
- `vstart` is an integral multiple of `EGS`

This instruction ignores`SEW`



Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAES256E(vs1, vs2, vd,)) = {
  assert(VLEN>=128);
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS
  elementgroups = (vl/EGS)
  egstart = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from egstart to elementgroups) {
    state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    ekey  : bits(256) = get_velem(vs1, EGW=128, i) @
                        get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i) ;
    rkey  : bits(128) = ekey[127..0];
    state = state ^ rkey;
    foreach(r from 1 to 14) {
      state = aes_inv_shift_rows(state);
      state = aes_inv_sub_bytes(state);
      state = state ^ rkey;
      state = aes_inv_mix_columns(state);
      rkey  = aes_256_reverse_key_schedule(r,ekey);
      ekey  = rkey @ ekey[256..128];
    }
    state = aes_inv_shift_rows(state);
    state = aes_inv_sub_bytes(state);
    state = state ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, state);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvknf>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
