doc/vector/insns/vaesdf.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaesdf, Vector AES decrypt final round]]
= vaesdf.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES final round decryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesdf.vv vd, vs2 + 
vaesdf.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00001'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00001'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001`'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description:: 
Performs the final-round decryption function of the AES block cipher.

The instruction encoding is reserved if vector register group `vd` overlaps with `vs2`.

The inputs and outputs to this instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each `EGW=128` element group of source `vd` holds the current round state and each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` holds the round key.

In the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds
a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group. 

Each `EGW=128` element group next round state output is produced by applying the InvShiftRows, InvSubBytes,  and AddRoundkey steps to the corresponding inputs and is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.    

- InvShiftRows(state)
- InvSubBytes(state)
- AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)


This instruction operates on element groups in the source and destination registers:

This instruction ignores `vtype.vsew`. +
The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `EEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`

[NOTE]
====
For the `.vs` form, since the least significant element group of register `vs2` is used for all element groups in register groups `vd`,
the destination vector register group `vd` cannot overlap with the single `vs2` vector register,
otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESDF(vs2, vd, suffix)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd,  EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_inv(state);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_inv(sr);
    let ark   : bits(128) = sb ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, ark);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Updated AES instructions to be more consistent
Clarified the overlap restrictions for the .vs instructions. Removed non-normative mentions of this requirement.
Put the data independent latency requirements in a common location.

doc/vector/insns/vaesdf.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaesdf, Vector AES decrypt final round]]
= vaesdf.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES final round decryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesdf.vv vd, vs2 + 
vaesdf.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00001'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00001'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001`'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description:: 
Performs the final-round decryption function of the AES block cipher.

In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group; the instruction encoding is reserved if the `vd` register group overlaps with `vs2`. 

The inputs and outputs to this instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each `EGW=128` element group of source `vd` holds the current round state and each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` holds the round key.

Each `EGW=128` element group next round state output is produced by applying the InvShiftRows, InvSubBytes,  and AddRoundkey steps to the corresponding inputs and is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.    

- InvShiftRows(state)
- InvSubBytes(state)
- AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)

This instruction operates on element groups in the source and destination registers.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

This instruction ignores `vtype.vsew`. +
The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `EEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`


Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESDF(vs2, vd, suffix)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd,  EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_inv(state);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_inv(sr);
    let ark   : bits(128) = sb ^ rkey;
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, ark);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
