doc/vector/insns/vaesdm.adoc, before:

[[insns-vaesdm, Vector AES decrypt middle round]]
= vaesdm.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES middle round decryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesdm.vv vd, vs2 +
vaesdm.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description:: 
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

This instruction implements the middle-round decryption function of the AES
block cipher.

In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in `vd`. While in this case `vs2` is a single register,
`vd` can be a register group; the instruction encoding is reserved if the `vd` register group overlaps with `vs2`. 

The inputs and outputs to this instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each `EGW=128` element group of source `vd` holds the current round state and each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` holds the round key.

Each `EGW=128` element group next round state output is produced by applying the InvShiftRows, InvSubBytes, AddRoundkey and InvMixColumns steps to the corresponding inputs and is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

- InvShiftRows(state)
- InvSubBytes(state)
- AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)
- InvMixColumns(state)

The result (i.e. the next round state) is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon. 

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESDM(vs2, vd, suffix)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_inv(state);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_inv(sr);
    let ark   : bits(128) = sb ^ rkey;
    let mix   : bits(128) = aes_mixcolumns_inv(ark);
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, mix);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Cleanup
Created a Reserved Encodings section for all instructions that have reserved encodings.
Improved consistency of instruction descriptions text.
riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups - toned down warnings about large LMULs and moved all into a non-normative note.
riscv-crypto-spec-vector - removed the definition of data-independent execution latency and pointed the reader to the Scalar Crypto Extensions Specification

doc/vector/insns/vaesdm.adoc, after:

[[insns-vaesdm, Vector AES decrypt middle round]]
= vaesdm.[vv,vs]

Synopsis::
Vector AES middle round decryption instruction.

Mnemonic::
vaesdm.vv vd, vs2 +
vaesdm.vs vd, vs2

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '00000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101001'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32
* Only for the `.vs` form: the `vd` register group overlaps the `vs2` register

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS 
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round state
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | round key
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | new round state
|===

Description::
....
This instruction performs the middle-round decryption function of the AES block cipher.

In the case of the `.vs` form of the instruction, element group 0 of the single register `vs2` holds a
single element group that is used
as the round key for all of the element groups in register group `vd`. 

The inputs and outputs to this instruction are comprised of 128-bit element groups.  Each `EGW=128` element group of source `vd` holds the current round state and each `EGW=128` element group of `vs2` holds the round key.

Each `EGW=128` element group next round state output is produced by applying the InvShiftRows, InvSubBytes, AddRoundkey and InvMixColumns steps to the corresponding inputs and is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

- InvShiftRows(state)
- InvSubBytes(state)
- AddRoundKey(state,roundkey)
- InvMixColumns(state)

The result (i.e. the next round state) is written to each `EGW=128` element group of `vd`.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon. 

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and 
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. + 
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.
....

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VAESDM(vs2, vd, suffix)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let keyelem = if suffix == "vv" then i else 0;
    let state : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);
    let rkey  : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, keyelem);
    let sr    : bits(128) = aes_shift_rows_inv(state);
    let sb    : bits(128) = aes_subbytes_inv(sr);
    let ark   : bits(128) = sb ^ rkey;
    let mix   : bits(128) = aes_mixcolumns_inv(ark);
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, mix);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkns>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
