doc/vector/insns/vandn.adoc, before:

[[insns-vandn, Vector And-Not]]
= vandn.[vv,vx,vi]

Synopsis::
Bitwise And-Not

Mnemonic::
vandn.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vandn.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm  +
vandn.vi vd, vs2, imm, vm

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '000001'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '000001'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Immediate)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVI'},
{bits: 5, name: 'imm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '000001'},
]}
....

Vector-Vector Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | Operand A
| Vs2 | input  | Operand B (to be inverted)
| Vd  | output | Result 
|===

Vector-Scalar/Immediate Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Rs1/imm | input  | Operand A
| Vs2     | input  | Operand B (to be inverted)
| Vd      | output | Result 
|===

Description:: 
A bitwise _and-not_ operation is performed.

Each bit in each element in `vs2` is inverted and then ANDed with the corresponding bit in either
`vs1` (vector-vector), the sign-extended or truncated value in scalar register `rs1` (vector-scalar),
or a sign-extended 5-bit immediate (vector immediate).

[NOTE]
.Note on necessity of instruction
====
This instruction is performance-critical to SHA3. Specifically, the Chi step of the FIPS 202 Keccak Permutation. 
Emulating it via 2 instructions is expected to have significant performance impact.
The `.vv` form of the instruction is what is needed for SHA3; the `.vx` and `.vi` forms were added for completeness.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VANDN(vs2, vs1, vd, suffix)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    let op1 = match suffix {
      "vv" => get_velem(vs1, EEW=SEW, i),
      "vx" => sext_or_truncate_to_sew(X(vs1)),
      "vi" => sext(vs1)
    };
    let op2 = get_velem(vs2, EEW=SEW, i);
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, op1 & ~op2);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Update: Zvkb instructions are executed with data independent execution latency
While the  zvkb instructions are general purpose bit-manipulations operations, they were included here for their utility in implementing cryptographic algorithms. Therefore, they need to have data independent execution latency.

doc/vector/insns/vandn.adoc, after:

[[insns-vandn, Vector And-Not]]
= vandn.[vv,vx,vi]

Synopsis::
Bitwise And-Not

Mnemonic::
vandn.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vandn.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm  +
vandn.vi vd, vs2, imm, vm

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '000001'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '000001'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Immediate)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVI'},
{bits: 5, name: 'imm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '000001'},
]}
....

Vector-Vector Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | Operand A
| Vs2 | input  | Operand B (to be inverted)
| Vd  | output | Result 
|===

Vector-Scalar/Immediate Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Rs1/imm | input  | Operand A
| Vs2     | input  | Operand B (to be inverted)
| Vd      | output | Result 
|===

Description:: 
A bitwise _and-not_ operation is performed.

Each bit in each element in `vs2` is inverted and then ANDed with the corresponding bit in either
`vs1` (vector-vector), the sign-extended or truncated value in scalar register `rs1` (vector-scalar),
or a sign-extended 5-bit immediate (vector immediate).

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[NOTE]
.Note on necessity of instruction
====
This instruction is performance-critical to SHA3. Specifically, the Chi step of the FIPS 202 Keccak Permutation. 
Emulating it via 2 instructions is expected to have significant performance impact.
The `.vv` form of the instruction is what is needed for SHA3; the `.vx` and `.vi` forms were added for completeness.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VANDN(vs2, vs1, vd, suffix)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    let op1 = match suffix {
      "vv" => get_velem(vs1, EEW=SEW, i),
      "vx" => sext_or_truncate_to_sew(X(vs1)),
      "vi" => sext(vs1)
    };
    let op2 = get_velem(vs2, EEW=SEW, i);
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, op1 & ~op2);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
