doc/vector/insns/vbrev8.adoc, before:

[[insns-vbrev8, Vector Reverse Bits in Bytes]]
= vbrev8.v

Synopsis::
Vector Reverse Bits in Bytes

Mnemonic::
vbrev8.v vd, vs2, vm

Encoding (Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '01000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs2 | input  | Input elements
| Vd  | output | Elements with bit-reversed bytes
|===

Description::
A bit reversal is performed on the bits of each byte.

[NOTE]
====
This instruction is commonly used for GCM when vghmac is not implemented.
This byte-wise instruction is defined for all SEWs to eliminate the need to change SEW when operating on wider elements.   
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VBREV8(vs2)) = {

  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    let input = get_velem(vs2, SEW, i);
    let output : bits(SEW) = 0;
    foreach (i from 0 to SEW-8 by 8)
      let output[i+7..i] = reverse_bits_in_byte(input[i+7..i]);
    set_velem(vd, SEW, i, output)
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Update: Zvkb instructions are executed with data independent execution latency
While the  zvkb instructions are general purpose bit-manipulations operations, they were included here for their utility in implementing cryptographic algorithms. Therefore, they need to have data independent execution latency.

doc/vector/insns/vbrev8.adoc, after:

[[insns-vbrev8, Vector Reverse Bits in Bytes]]
= vbrev8.v

Synopsis::
Vector Reverse Bits in Bytes

Mnemonic::
vbrev8.v vd, vs2, vm

Encoding (Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '01000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs2 | input  | Input elements
| Vd  | output | Elements with bit-reversed bytes
|===

Description::
A bit reversal is performed on the bits of each byte.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[NOTE]
====
This instruction is commonly used for GCM when vghmac is not implemented.
This byte-wise instruction is defined for all SEWs to eliminate the need to change SEW when operating on wider elements.   
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VBREV8(vs2)) = {

  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    let input = get_velem(vs2, SEW, i);
    let output : bits(SEW) = 0;
    foreach (i from 0 to SEW-8 by 8)
      let output[i+7..i] = reverse_bits_in_byte(input[i+7..i]);
    set_velem(vd, SEW, i, output)
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
