doc/vector/insns/vclmulh.adoc, before:

[[insns-vclmulh, Vector Carry-less Multiply Return High Half]]
= vclmulh.[vv,vx]

Synopsis::
Vector Carry-less Multiply by vector or scalar - returning high half of product.

Mnemonic::
vclmulh.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vclmulh.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '001101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '001101'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 64

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | multiplier
| Vs2 | input  | multiplicand
| Vd  | output | carry-less product high
|===

Description:: 
Produces the high half of 128-bit carry-less product.

Each 64-bit element in the `vs2` vector register is carry-less multiplied by 
either each 64-bit element in `vs1` (vector-vector), or the 64-bit value
from integer register `rs1` (vector-scalar). The result is the most
significant 64 bits of the carry-less product.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VCLMULH(vs2, vs1, vd, suffix)) = {

  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    let op1 : bits (64) = if suffix =="vv" then get_velem(vs1,i) else zext_or_truncate_to_sew(X(vs1));
    let op2 : bits (64) = get_velem(vs2, i);
    let product : bits (64) = clmulh(op1, op2, SEW);
    set_velem(vd, i, product);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clmulh(x, y, width) = {
  let result : bits(width) = 0;
  foreach (i from 1 to (width - 1)) {
    if y[i] == 1 then result = result ^ (x >> (width - i));
  }
  result
}

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Update: Zvkb instructions are executed with data independent execution latency
While the  zvkb instructions are general purpose bit-manipulations operations, they were included here for their utility in implementing cryptographic algorithms. Therefore, they need to have data independent execution latency.

doc/vector/insns/vclmulh.adoc, after:

[[insns-vclmulh, Vector Carry-less Multiply Return High Half]]
= vclmulh.[vv,vx]

Synopsis::
Vector Carry-less Multiply by vector or scalar - returning high half of product.

Mnemonic::
vclmulh.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vclmulh.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '001101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '001101'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 64

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | multiplier
| Vs2 | input  | multiplicand
| Vd  | output | carry-less product high
|===

Description:: 
Produces the high half of 128-bit carry-less product.

Each 64-bit element in the `vs2` vector register is carry-less multiplied by 
either each 64-bit element in `vs1` (vector-vector), or the 64-bit value
from integer register `rs1` (vector-scalar). The result is the most
significant 64 bits of the carry-less product.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VCLMULH(vs2, vs1, vd, suffix)) = {

  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    let op1 : bits (64) = if suffix =="vv" then get_velem(vs1,i) else zext_or_truncate_to_sew(X(vs1));
    let op2 : bits (64) = get_velem(vs2, i);
    let product : bits (64) = clmulh(op1, op2, SEW);
    set_velem(vd, i, product);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clmulh(x, y, width) = {
  let result : bits(width) = 0;
  foreach (i from 1 to (width - 1)) {
    if y[i] == 1 then result = result ^ (x >> (width - i));
  }
  result
}

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
