doc/vector/insns/vghmac.adoc, before:

[[insns-vghmac, Vector GHASH Multiply Accumulate]]
= vghmac.vv

Synopsis::
Vector Carryless Multiply Accumulate over GHASH Galois-Field

Mnemonic::
vghmac.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101100'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32 

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial hash (Y~i~)
| Vs1 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Hash Subkey (H)
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Block Cipher output (X~i+1~)
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial-hash (Y~i+1~)
|===

Description:: 
A single "iteration" of the GHASH~H~ algorithm is performed.

This instruction treats all of the inputs and outputs as 128-bit polynomials. 
It produces the next partial hash (Y~i+1~) by multiplying (over GF(2^128^)) the current partial
hash (Y~i~) by the Hash Subkey (H) and adding (over GF[2]) this product to the next block of
cipher text (X~i+1~).

The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is a carryless multiply of two 128-bit polynomials
modulo GHASH's irreducible polynomial (x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1).

The operation can be compactly defined as
Y~i+1~ = (Y~i~ &#183; H) ^ X~i+1~ `// with Y~0~ = X~0~

The NIST specification (see <<zvkg>>) orders the coefficients from left to right x~0~x~1~x~2~...x~127~
for a polynomial x~0~ + x~1~u +x~2~ u^2^ + ... + x~127~u^127^. This can be viewed as a collection of
byte elements in memory with the byte containing the lowest coefficients (i.e., 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7)
residing at the lowest memory address. Since the bits in the bytes are reversed, 
This instruction internally performs bit swaps within bytes to put the bits in the standard ordering
(e.g., 7,6,5,4,3,2,1,0).

[Note]
====
We are bit-reversing the bytes of inputs and outputs so that the intermediate values are consistent
with the NIST specification. These reversals are inexpensive to implement as they unconditionally
swap bit positions and therefore do not require any logic.
====


//The next partial hash (Y~i+1~) is produced by multiplying (over GF(2^128^)) the current partial
//hash (Y~i~) by the Hash Subkey (H) and adding (over GF[2]) this product to the next block of
//cipher text (X~i+1~).
//The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is a carryless multiply of two 128-bit polynomials
//modulo the irreducible polynomial (x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1) used by GHASH.





// [Note]
// ====
// To understand the inputs from the algorithm point of view, they can be viewed as being bit-serial
// with the least significant bit (i.e. bit 0) arriving first and the subsequent bits being concatenated on the right.
// The first group of 8 bits is byte 0, the second is byte 1 and so on until byte 15.
// When we represent these elements in a RISC-V vector element group, byte 0 is the rightmost byte and byte 15 is
// the leftmost. Since the leftmost bit of each byte is now holding the lsb, we perform a bit-reverse operation to
// get the bits in the order 7 to 0.
// Now the element group holds the most significant bit (i.e., bit 127) on the left and the least significant bit
// (i.e., bit 0) on the right. While this is the reverse of how bits are shown in the specification, it is in the
// order that we are used to, and allows us to use standard polynomial multiply operations and to use 0x87 as the least
// significant 128 bits of the irreducible polynomial.
// ====


// The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is defined in the spec as follows:
//
// . Let `R` be the bit string `11100001 || 0^120^`
// . Let `x~0~x~1~...x~127~` denote the sequence of bits in `X`.
// . Let `Z~0~ = 0^128^` and `V~0~ = Y`.
// . For i = 0 to 127 // calculate blocks `Z~i+1~` and `V~i+1~` as follows:
// .. `Z~i+1~ := X~i~ ? (Z~i~ ^ V~i~), Z~i~`
// .. `V~i+1~ := (V~i~ & 1) ? (V~i~ >> 1) &#8853; R, V~i~ >> 1`
// . Return `Z~128~`.

// [Note]
// ====
// In the above definition, the least significant bit is on the left and the most significant it on the right.
// Shifting to the right by one place is effectively multiplying by 2.
// The V value is multiplied by 2 and then reduced if the shifted off MSB==1.
// This allows the value to remain representable in 128 bits.

// This instruction effectively applies a single 128x128 carryless multiply producing a 255-bit product which it reduces
// by multiplying the most significant 127 bits by the irreducible polynomial x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1,
// and adding it to the least significant 128 bits,
// producing a 128-bit result which is written to the corresponding element group in `vd`.
// ====


Operation::
[source,pseudocode]
--
function clause execute (VGHMAC(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  // operands are input with bits reversed in each byte
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0)   //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let Y = brev8(get_velem(vd,EGW=128,i));  // current partial-hash
    let H = brev8(get_velem(vs1,EGW=128,i)); // Hash subkey
    let X = get_velem(vs2,EGW=128,i);       // next block cipher output
    let Z : bits(128) = 0;

    for (int bit = 0; bit < 128; bit++) {
      if bit_to_bool(Y[bit])
        Z ^= H

      bool reduce = bit_to_bool(H[127]);
      H = H << 1; // left shift H by 1
      if (reduce)
        H ^= 0x87; // Reduce using x^7 + x^2 + x^1 + 1 polynomial
    }

    let sum[127:0] = brev8(Z) ^ X; // bit reverse bytes of product to get back to GCM standard ordering

    let result = sum[127:0]; 
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, result);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS



}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkg>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Update: Zvkb instructions are executed with data independent execution latency
While the  zvkb instructions are general purpose bit-manipulations operations, they were included here for their utility in implementing cryptographic algorithms. Therefore, they need to have data independent execution latency.

doc/vector/insns/vghmac.adoc, after:

[[insns-vghmac, Vector GHASH Multiply Accumulate]]
= vghmac.vv

Synopsis::
Vector Carryless Multiply Accumulate over GHASH Galois-Field

Mnemonic::
vghmac.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101100'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32 

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial hash (Y~i~)
| Vs1 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Hash Subkey (H)
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Block Cipher output (X~i+1~)
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial-hash (Y~i+1~)
|===

Description:: 
A single "iteration" of the GHASH~H~ algorithm is performed.

This instruction treats all of the inputs and outputs as 128-bit polynomials. 
It produces the next partial hash (Y~i+1~) by multiplying (over GF(2^128^)) the current partial
hash (Y~i~) by the Hash Subkey (H) and adding (over GF[2]) this product to the next block of
cipher text (X~i+1~).

The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is a carryless multiply of two 128-bit polynomials
modulo GHASH's irreducible polynomial (x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1).

The operation can be compactly defined as
Y~i+1~ = (Y~i~ &#183; H) ^ X~i+1~ `// with Y~0~ = X~0~

The NIST specification (see <<zvkg>>) orders the coefficients from left to right x~0~x~1~x~2~...x~127~
for a polynomial x~0~ + x~1~u +x~2~ u^2^ + ... + x~127~u^127^. This can be viewed as a collection of
byte elements in memory with the byte containing the lowest coefficients (i.e., 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7)
residing at the lowest memory address. Since the bits in the bytes are reversed, 
This instruction internally performs bit swaps within bytes to put the bits in the standard ordering
(e.g., 7,6,5,4,3,2,1,0).

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[Note]
====
We are bit-reversing the bytes of inputs and outputs so that the intermediate values are consistent
with the NIST specification. These reversals are inexpensive to implement as they unconditionally
swap bit positions and therefore do not require any logic.
====


//The next partial hash (Y~i+1~) is produced by multiplying (over GF(2^128^)) the current partial
//hash (Y~i~) by the Hash Subkey (H) and adding (over GF[2]) this product to the next block of
//cipher text (X~i+1~).
//The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is a carryless multiply of two 128-bit polynomials
//modulo the irreducible polynomial (x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1) used by GHASH.





// [Note]
// ====
// To understand the inputs from the algorithm point of view, they can be viewed as being bit-serial
// with the least significant bit (i.e. bit 0) arriving first and the subsequent bits being concatenated on the right.
// The first group of 8 bits is byte 0, the second is byte 1 and so on until byte 15.
// When we represent these elements in a RISC-V vector element group, byte 0 is the rightmost byte and byte 15 is
// the leftmost. Since the leftmost bit of each byte is now holding the lsb, we perform a bit-reverse operation to
// get the bits in the order 7 to 0.
// Now the element group holds the most significant bit (i.e., bit 127) on the left and the least significant bit
// (i.e., bit 0) on the right. While this is the reverse of how bits are shown in the specification, it is in the
// order that we are used to, and allows us to use standard polynomial multiply operations and to use 0x87 as the least
// significant 128 bits of the irreducible polynomial.
// ====


// The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is defined in the spec as follows:
//
// . Let `R` be the bit string `11100001 || 0^120^`
// . Let `x~0~x~1~...x~127~` denote the sequence of bits in `X`.
// . Let `Z~0~ = 0^128^` and `V~0~ = Y`.
// . For i = 0 to 127 // calculate blocks `Z~i+1~` and `V~i+1~` as follows:
// .. `Z~i+1~ := X~i~ ? (Z~i~ ^ V~i~), Z~i~`
// .. `V~i+1~ := (V~i~ & 1) ? (V~i~ >> 1) &#8853; R, V~i~ >> 1`
// . Return `Z~128~`.

// [Note]
// ====
// In the above definition, the least significant bit is on the left and the most significant it on the right.
// Shifting to the right by one place is effectively multiplying by 2.
// The V value is multiplied by 2 and then reduced if the shifted off MSB==1.
// This allows the value to remain representable in 128 bits.

// This instruction effectively applies a single 128x128 carryless multiply producing a 255-bit product which it reduces
// by multiplying the most significant 127 bits by the irreducible polynomial x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1,
// and adding it to the least significant 128 bits,
// producing a 128-bit result which is written to the corresponding element group in `vd`.
// ====


Operation::
[source,pseudocode]
--
function clause execute (VGHMAC(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  // operands are input with bits reversed in each byte
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0)   //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let Y = brev8(get_velem(vd,EGW=128,i));  // current partial-hash
    let H = brev8(get_velem(vs1,EGW=128,i)); // Hash subkey
    let X = get_velem(vs2,EGW=128,i);       // next block cipher output
    let Z : bits(128) = 0;

    for (int bit = 0; bit < 128; bit++) {
      if bit_to_bool(Y[bit])
        Z ^= H

      bool reduce = bit_to_bool(H[127]);
      H = H << 1; // left shift H by 1
      if (reduce)
        H ^= 0x87; // Reduce using x^7 + x^2 + x^1 + 1 polynomial
    }

    let sum[127:0] = brev8(Z) ^ X; // bit reverse bytes of product to get back to GCM standard ordering

    let result = sum[127:0]; 
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, result);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS



}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkg>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
