doc/vector/insns/vghsh.adoc, before:

[[insns-vghsh, Vector GHASH Add-Multiply]]
= vghsh.vv

Synopsis::
Vector Add-Multiply over GHASH Galois-Field

Mnemonic::
vghsh.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101100'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32 

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial hash (Y~i~)
| Vs1 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Cipher text (X~i~)
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Hash Subkey (H)
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial-hash (Y~i+1~)
|===

Description:: 
A single "iteration" of the GHASH~H~ algorithm is performed.

This instruction treats all of the inputs and outputs as 128-bit polynomials and 
performs operations over GF[2].
It produces the next partial hash (Y~i+1~) by adding the current partial
hash (Y~i~) to the cipher text block (X~i~) and then multiplying (over GF(2^128^))
this sum by the Hash Subkey (H).

The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is a carryless multiply of two 128-bit polynomials
modulo GHASH's irreducible polynomial (x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1).

The operation can be compactly defined as
// Y~i+1~ = (Y~i~ &#183; H) ^ X~i~
Y~i+1~ = ((Y~i~ ^ X~i~) &#183; H)

The NIST specification (see <<zvkg>>) orders the coefficients from left to right x~0~x~1~x~2~...x~127~
for a polynomial x~0~ + x~1~u +x~2~ u^2^ + ... + x~127~u^127^. This can be viewed as a collection of
byte elements in memory with the byte containing the lowest coefficients (i.e., 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7)
residing at the lowest memory address. Since the bits in the bytes are reversed, 
This instruction internally performs bit swaps within bytes to put the bits in the standard ordering
(e.g., 7,6,5,4,3,2,1,0).

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[NOTE]
====
We are bit-reversing the bytes of inputs and outputs so that the intermediate values are consistent
with the NIST specification. These reversals are inexpensive to implement as they unconditionally
swap bit positions and therefore do not require any logic.
====

Operation::
[source,pseudocode]
--
function clause execute (VGHSH(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  // operands are input with bits reversed in each byte
  if(LMUL*VLEN < EGW)  then {
    handle_illegal();  // illegal instruction exception
    RETIRE_FAIL
  } else {

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let Y = (get_velem(vd,EGW=128,i));  // current partial-hash
    let X = get_velem(vs1,EGW=128,i);  // block cipher output
    let H = brev8(get_velem(vs2,EGW=128,i)); // Hash subkey

    let Z : bits(128) = 0;

    let S = brev8(Y ^ X);

    for (int bit = 0; bit < 128; bit++) {
      if bit_to_bool(S[bit])
        Z ^= H

      bool reduce = bit_to_bool(H[127]);
      H = H << 1; // left shift H by 1
      if (reduce)
        H ^= 0x87; // Reduce using x^7 + x^2 + x^1 + 1 polynomial
    }

    let result = brev8(Z); // bit reverse bytes to get back to GCM standard ordering
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, result);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
 }
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkg>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Added explanatory text for potential variations
Future extensions might add vghsh.vs and carryless multiply with SEW=32

Clean-up of wording for .vs variants.

doc/vector/insns/vghsh.adoc, after:

[[insns-vghsh, Vector GHASH Add-Multiply]]
= vghsh.vv

Synopsis::
Vector Add-Multiply over GHASH Galois-Field

Mnemonic::
vghsh.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101100'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32 

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial hash (Y~i~)
| Vs1 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Cipher text (X~i~)
| Vs2 | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Hash Subkey (H)
| Vd  | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Partial-hash (Y~i+1~)
|===

Description:: 
A single "iteration" of the GHASH~H~ algorithm is performed.

This instruction treats all of the inputs and outputs as 128-bit polynomials and 
performs operations over GF[2].
It produces the next partial hash (Y~i+1~) by adding the current partial
hash (Y~i~) to the cipher text block (X~i~) and then multiplying (over GF(2^128^))
this sum by the Hash Subkey (H).

The multiplication over GF(2^128^) is a carryless multiply of two 128-bit polynomials
modulo GHASH's irreducible polynomial (x^128^ + x^7^ + x^2^ + x + 1).

The operation can be compactly defined as
// Y~i+1~ = (Y~i~ &#183; H) ^ X~i~
Y~i+1~ = ((Y~i~ ^ X~i~) &#183; H)

The NIST specification (see <<zvkg>>) orders the coefficients from left to right x~0~x~1~x~2~...x~127~
for a polynomial x~0~ + x~1~u +x~2~ u^2^ + ... + x~127~u^127^. This can be viewed as a collection of
byte elements in memory with the byte containing the lowest coefficients (i.e., 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7)
residing at the lowest memory address. Since the bits in the bytes are reversed, 
This instruction internally performs bit swaps within bytes to put the bits in the standard ordering
(e.g., 7,6,5,4,3,2,1,0).

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[NOTE]
====
We are bit-reversing the bytes of inputs and outputs so that the intermediate values are consistent
with the NIST specification. These reversals are inexpensive to implement as they unconditionally
swap bit positions and therefore do not require any logic.
====

[NOTE]
====
Since we expect the same hash key `H` to be used for many of the iterations of `vgsh.v` for a given message,
a future extension might define a vector-scalar version of this instruction where
`vs2` is the scalar element group. This would help reduce register pressure when `LMUL` > 1. 
====

Operation::
[source,pseudocode]
--
function clause execute (VGHSH(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  // operands are input with bits reversed in each byte
  if(LMUL*VLEN < EGW)  then {
    handle_illegal();  // illegal instruction exception
    RETIRE_FAIL
  } else {

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let Y = (get_velem(vd,EGW=128,i));  // current partial-hash
    let X = get_velem(vs1,EGW=128,i);  // block cipher output
    let H = brev8(get_velem(vs2,EGW=128,i)); // Hash subkey

    let Z : bits(128) = 0;

    let S = brev8(Y ^ X);

    for (int bit = 0; bit < 128; bit++) {
      if bit_to_bool(S[bit])
        Z ^= H

      bool reduce = bit_to_bool(H[127]);
      H = H << 1; // left shift H by 1
      if (reduce)
        H ^= 0x87; // Reduce using x^7 + x^2 + x^1 + 1 polynomial
    }

    let result = brev8(Z); // bit reverse bytes to get back to GCM standard ordering
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, result);
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
 }
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkg>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
