doc/vector/insns/vrev8.adoc, before:

[[insns-vrev8, Vector Reverse Bytes]]
= vrev8.v

Synopsis::
Vector Reverse Bytes

Mnemonic::
vrev8.v vd, vs2, vm

Encoding (Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '01001'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs2 | input  | Input elements
| Vd  | output | Byte-reversed elements
|===

Description::
A byte reversal is performed on each element of `vs2`, effectively performing an endian swap.

[NOTE]
====
This element-wise endian swapping is needed for several cryptographic algorithms including SHA2 and SM3.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VREV8(vs2)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    input = get_velem(vs2, SEW, i);
    let output : SEW = 0;
    let j = SEW - 1;
    foreach (k from 0 to (SEW - 8) by 8) {
      output[k..(k + 7)] = input[(j - 7)..j];
      j = j - 8;
    set_velem(vd, SEW, i, output)
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Update: Zvkb instructions are executed with data independent execution latency
While the  zvkb instructions are general purpose bit-manipulations operations, they were included here for their utility in implementing cryptographic algorithms. Therefore, they need to have data independent execution latency.

doc/vector/insns/vrev8.adoc, after:

[[insns-vrev8, Vector Reverse Bytes]]
= vrev8.v

Synopsis::
Vector Reverse Bytes

Mnemonic::
vrev8.v vd, vs2, vm

Encoding (Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '01001'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010010'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs2 | input  | Input elements
| Vd  | output | Byte-reversed elements
|===

Description::
A byte reversal is performed on each element of `vs2`, effectively performing an endian swap.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[NOTE]
====
This element-wise endian swapping is needed for several cryptographic algorithms including SHA2 and SM3.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VREV8(vs2)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl-1) {
    input = get_velem(vs2, SEW, i);
    let output : SEW = 0;
    let j = SEW - 1;
    foreach (k from 0 to (SEW - 8) by 8) {
      output[k..(k + 7)] = input[(j - 7)..j];
      j = j - 8;
    set_velem(vd, SEW, i, output)
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
