doc/vector/insns/vrol.adoc, before:

[[insns-vrol, Vector Rotate Left]]
= vrol.[vv,vx]

Synopsis::
Vector rotate left by vector/scalar.

Mnemonic::
vrol.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vrol.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm +

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010101'},
]}
....

Vector-Vector Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | Rotate amount
| Vs2 | input  | Data
| Vd  | output | Rotated data 
|===

Vector-Scalar Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Rs1     | input  | Rotate amount
| Vs2     | input  | Data
| Vd      | output | Rotated data
|===

Description:: 
A bitwise left rotation is performed on each element of `vs2`

The elements in `vs2` are rotated left by the rotate amount specified by either 
the cotrresponding elements of `vs1` (vector-vector), or integer register `rs1`
(vector-scalar).
Only the low log2(`SEW`) bits of the rotate-amount value are used, all other
bits are ignored.

[NOTE]
====
There is no immediate form of this instruction (i.e., `vrol.vi`) as the same result can be achieved by negating
the rotate amount and using the immediate form of rotate right instruction (i.e., vror.vi).
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VROL_VV(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i,
      get_velem(vs2, i) <<< (get_velem(vs1, i) & (SEW-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VROL_VX(vs2, rs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) <<< (X(rs1) & (SEW-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Update: Zvkb instructions are executed with data independent execution latency
While the  zvkb instructions are general purpose bit-manipulations operations, they were included here for their utility in implementing cryptographic algorithms. Therefore, they need to have data independent execution latency.

doc/vector/insns/vrol.adoc, after:

[[insns-vrol, Vector Rotate Left]]
= vrol.[vv,vx]

Synopsis::
Vector rotate left by vector/scalar.

Mnemonic::
vrol.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vrol.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm +

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '010101'},
]}
....

Vector-Vector Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | Rotate amount
| Vs2 | input  | Data
| Vd  | output | Rotated data 
|===

Vector-Scalar Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Rs1     | input  | Rotate amount
| Vs2     | input  | Data
| Vd      | output | Rotated data
|===

Description:: 
A bitwise left rotation is performed on each element of `vs2`

The elements in `vs2` are rotated left by the rotate amount specified by either 
the cotrresponding elements of `vs1` (vector-vector), or integer register `rs1`
(vector-scalar).
Only the low log2(`SEW`) bits of the rotate-amount value are used, all other
bits are ignored.

This instruction must always be implemented such that its execution latency does not depend
on the data being operated upon.

[NOTE]
====
There is no immediate form of this instruction (i.e., `vrol.vi`) as the same result can be achieved by negating
the rotate amount and using the immediate form of rotate right instruction (i.e., vror.vi).
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VROL_VV(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i,
      get_velem(vs2, i) <<< (get_velem(vs1, i) & (SEW-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VROL_VX(vs2, rs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) <<< (X(rs1) & (SEW-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
