doc/vector/insns/vror.adoc, before:

[[insns-vror, Vector Rotate Right]]
= vror.[vv,vx,vi]

Synopsis::
Vector rotate right by vector/scalar/immediate.

Mnemonic::
vror.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vror.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm +
vror.vi vd, imm, vs1, vm

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Immediate)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'imm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Description:: 
This instruction performs a bitwise right rotation on vector elements.
The data to be rotated is in the vector register group specifed by `vs2` and
the rotate amount value can come from a vector register group `vs1`, a scalar
integer register `rs1`, or a zero-extended 5-bit immediate.
Only the low `log2(SEW)` bits of the rotate-amount value are used to contror
the rotate amount.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VROR_VV(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i,
      get_velem(vs2, i) >>> (get_velem(vs1, i) & (SEW-1))
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VROR_VX(vs2, rs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) >>> (X(rs1) & (SEW-1))
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VROR_VI(vs2, imm, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) >>> (imm & (SEW-1))
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

added comment to rotate immediate limitations

doc/vector/insns/vror.adoc, after:

[[insns-vror, Vector Rotate Right]]
= vror.[vv,vx,vi]

Synopsis::
Vector rotate right by vector/scalar/immediate.

Only the log2(SEW) bits are used for the rotate amount.

Note::
The immediate form of this instruction doesn't support all rotate amounts as 6 bits are required
to encode these. This is the same limitation as exists in the vector shift instructions

Mnemonic::
vror.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vror.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm +
vror.vi vd, imm, vs1, vm

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Immediate)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'imm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: 'funct6'},
]}
....

Description:: 
This instruction performs a bitwise right rotation on vector elements.
The data to be rotated is in the vector register group specifed by `vs2` and
the rotate amount value can come from a vector register group `vs1`, a scalar
integer register `rs1`, or a zero-extended 5-bit immediate.
Only the low `log2(SEW)` bits of the rotate-amount value are used to contror
the rotate amount.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VROR_VV(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i,
      get_velem(vs2, i) >>> (get_velem(vs1, i) & (SEW-1))
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VROR_VX(vs2, rs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) >>> (X(rs1) & (SEW-1))
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VROR_VI(vs2, imm, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) >>> (imm & (SEW-1))
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvkb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
