doc/vector/insns/vsha2ms.adoc, before:

[[insns-vsha2ms, Vector SHA-2 Message Schedule]]
= vsha2ms.vv

Synopsis::
Vector SHA-2 message schedule.

Mnemonic::
vsha2ms.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101101'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[3],  W[2],  W[1],  W[0]}
| Vs1 | input  | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[11], W[10], W[9],  W[4]}
| Vs2 | input  | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[15], W[14], W[13], W[12]}
| Vd  | output | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[19], W[18], W[17], W[16]}
|===

Description::
`SEW` must be either 32 or 64, otherwise this instruction encoding is reserved.
- When `SEW`=32, this instruction implements 4 rounds of SHA-256 message
schedule expansion with EGW=128 (`zvknha` and `zvknhb`)
- When `SEW`=64, this instruction implements 4 rounds of SHA-512 message
schedule expansion with EGW=256 (`zvknhb` only)

This instruction takes in a subset of the last 16 message-schedule `SEW`-sized "words"
and produces the next 4 message-schedule words.

The message schedule words must be endian swapped before being consumed by this instruction.

Four `SEW` message schedule words are packed into each `EGW` element group of the
source and destination registers. The message schedule words are packed into the
element groups from the left to the right with the most significant word on the left
and the least significant word on the right.



This instructions takes in 11 of the last 16 words of the message schedule. The last 16
words of the message schedule are shown here in an element group.
The subscripts show the relative age, where W~0~ is the oldest and W~15~ is the most recent
of the 16 words.

`{W~3~, W~2~, W~1~, W~0~} +
{W~7~, W~6~, W~5~, W~4~} +
{W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~8~} +
{W~15~, W~14~, W~13~, W~12~}`

Since W~5~ through W~8~ are not needed in these calculations, we are able to compact these into
three element groups

`{W~3~, W~2~, W~1~, W~0~} +
{W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~4~} +
{W~15~, W~14~, W~13~, W~12~}`

[TIP]
.Note to software developers
====
The combining of these element groups as shown here can easily be obtained using a vector
vmerge instruction with the appropriate mask (for example with `vl=4` and `4b0001` as the least 4 significant bits)

`vmerge.vvm {W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~4~}, {W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~8~}, {W~7~, W~6~, W~5~, W~4~}, V0`


====

The instruction calculates the next 4 words of the message schedule:

`{W~19~, W~18~, W~17~, W~16~}`

The number of words to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`

// This instruction requires that `Zvl128b` be implemented (i.e `VLEN>=128`).

[NOTE]
====
W~13~ is not used by the instruction for producing the next 4 message schedule words.
====

// [NOTE]
// ====
// Many vector units that are wider than 128 bits may choose to only implement one
// 128-bit datapath for this instruction. This needs to be transparent to code in terms
// of functionality. A vector length setting of wider than 128 bits would require some
// sort of instruction expansion.
// ====

This instruction is not masked. If any element groups are not to be processed, the _vl_
must be set accordingly. It is not possible to skip an intermediary element group.
`VLMUL` must be at least 1. In typical usage it is expected to be 1.
There are three source operands: `vd`, `vs1` and `vs2`. The result
is written to `vd`.

NB:: for implementations with `VLEN < EGW`, the minimal `VLMUL` is `EGW / VLEN`.

In this code the input elements are numbered from 0 (16 words ago) to 15 (most recent message-schedule word).
The outputs are numbered from 16 to 19.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VSHA2ms(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  // This pseudo code needs to be updated to support SHA-256 _and_ SHA-512
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)

  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    {W[3],  W[2],  W[1],  W[0]}  : bits(EGW) = get_velem(vd, SEW, i);
    {W[11], W[10], W[9],  W[4]}  : bits(EGW) = get_velem(vs1, SEW, i);
    {W[15], W[14], W[13], W[12]} : bits(EGW) = get_velem(vs2, SEW, i);
  
    W[16] = sig1(W[14]) + W[9]  + sig0(W[1]) + W[0];
    W[17] = sig1(W[15]) + W[10] + sig0(W[2]) + W[1];
    W[18] = sig1(W[16]) + W[11] + sig0(W[3]) + W[2];
    W[19] = sig1(W[17]) + W[12] + sig0(W[4]) + W[3];

    set_velem(vd, EGW, i, {W[19],W[18],W[17],W[16]});
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

// SHA256
function sig0(x) = ROTR(x,7)  XOR ROTR(x,18) XOR SHR(x,3)
function sig1(x) = ROTR(x,17) XOR ROTR(x,19) XOR SHR(x,10)

// SHA512
function sig0(x) = ROTR(x,1)  XOR ROTR(x,8)  XOR SHR(x,7);
function sig1(x) = ROTR(x,19) XOR ROTR(x,61) XOR SHR(x,6);

function ROTR(x,n) = (x >> n) | (x << w - n)
function SHR (x,n) = x >> n

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvknh, zvknh[ab]>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

specifying non overlap constraint for vsha2ms

doc/vector/insns/vsha2ms.adoc, after:

[[insns-vsha2ms, Vector SHA-2 Message Schedule]]
= vsha2ms.vv

Synopsis::
Vector SHA-2 message schedule.

Mnemonic::
vsha2ms.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101101'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd  | input  | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[3],  W[2],  W[1],  W[0]}
| Vs1 | input  | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[11], W[10], W[9],  W[4]}
| Vs2 | input  | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[15], W[14], W[13], W[12]}
| Vd  | output | 4*SEW  | 4 | SEW | Message words {W[19], W[18], W[17], W[16]}
|===

Description::
`SEW` must be either 32 or 64, otherwise this instruction encoding is reserved.
- When `SEW`=32, this instruction implements 4 rounds of SHA-256 message
schedule expansion with EGW=128 (`zvknha` and `zvknhb`)
- When `SEW`=64, this instruction implements 4 rounds of SHA-512 message
schedule expansion with EGW=256 (`zvknhb` only)

This instruction takes in a subset of the last 16 message-schedule `SEW`-sized "words"
and produces the next 4 message-schedule words.

The message schedule words must be endian swapped before being consumed by this instruction.

Four `SEW` message schedule words are packed into each `EGW` element group of the
source and destination registers. The message schedule words are packed into the
element groups from the left to the right with the most significant word on the left
and the least significant word on the right.


This instructions takes in 11 of the last 16 words of the message schedule. The last 16
words of the message schedule are shown here in an element group.
The subscripts show the relative age, where W~0~ is the oldest and W~15~ is the most recent
of the 16 words.

`{W~3~, W~2~, W~1~, W~0~} +
{W~7~, W~6~, W~5~, W~4~} +
{W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~8~} +
{W~15~, W~14~, W~13~, W~12~}`

Since W~5~ through W~8~ are not needed in these calculations, we are able to compact these into
three element groups

`{W~3~, W~2~, W~1~, W~0~} +
{W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~4~} +
{W~15~, W~14~, W~13~, W~12~}`

[TIP]
.Note to software developers
====
The combining of these element groups as shown here can easily be obtained using a vector
vmerge instruction with the appropriate mask (for example with `vl=4` and `4b0001` as the least 4 significant bits)

`vmerge.vvm {W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~4~}, {W~11~, W~10~, W~9~, W~8~}, {W~7~, W~6~, W~5~, W~4~}, V0`


====

The instruction calculates the next 4 words of the message schedule:

`{W~19~, W~18~, W~17~, W~16~}`

The number of words to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`

The case where the `vd` register group overlap with either `vs1` or `vs2` is reserved.

[NOTE]
====
Preventing overlap between `vd` and `vs1` or `vs2` simplifies implementation with `VLEN < EGW`` while not impacting larger VLEN since it does not make sense to reuse a register group for different message schedule indices.
====


// This instruction requires that `Zvl128b` be implemented (i.e `VLEN>=128`).

[NOTE]
====
W~13~ is not used by the instruction for producing the next 4 message schedule words.
====

// [NOTE]
// ====
// Many vector units that are wider than 128 bits may choose to only implement one
// 128-bit datapath for this instruction. This needs to be transparent to code in terms
// of functionality. A vector length setting of wider than 128 bits would require some
// sort of instruction expansion.
// ====

This instruction is not masked. If any element groups are not to be processed, the _vl_
must be set accordingly. It is not possible to skip an intermediary element group.
`VLMUL` must be at least 1. In typical usage it is expected to be 1.
There are three source operands: `vd`, `vs1` and `vs2`. The result
is written to `vd`.

NB:: for implementations with `VLEN < EGW`, the minimal `VLMUL` is `EGW / VLEN`.

In this code the input elements are numbered from 0 (16 words ago) to 15 (most recent message-schedule word).
The outputs are numbered from 16 to 19.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VSHA2ms(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  // This pseudo code needs to be updated to support SHA-256 _and_ SHA-512
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)

  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    {W[3],  W[2],  W[1],  W[0]}  : bits(EGW) = get_velem(vd, SEW, i);
    {W[11], W[10], W[9],  W[4]}  : bits(EGW) = get_velem(vs1, SEW, i);
    {W[15], W[14], W[13], W[12]} : bits(EGW) = get_velem(vs2, SEW, i);
  
    W[16] = sig1(W[14]) + W[9]  + sig0(W[1]) + W[0];
    W[17] = sig1(W[15]) + W[10] + sig0(W[2]) + W[1];
    W[18] = sig1(W[16]) + W[11] + sig0(W[3]) + W[2];
    W[19] = sig1(W[17]) + W[12] + sig0(W[4]) + W[3];

    set_velem(vd, EGW, i, {W[19],W[18],W[17],W[16]});
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

// SHA256
function sig0(x) = ROTR(x,7)  XOR ROTR(x,18) XOR SHR(x,3)
function sig1(x) = ROTR(x,17) XOR ROTR(x,19) XOR SHR(x,10)

// SHA512
function sig0(x) = ROTR(x,1)  XOR ROTR(x,8)  XOR SHR(x,7);
function sig1(x) = ROTR(x,19) XOR ROTR(x,61) XOR SHR(x,6);

function ROTR(x,n) = (x >> n) | (x << w - n)
function SHR (x,n) = x >> n

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvknh, zvknh[ab]>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
