doc/vector/insns/vsm3c.adoc, before:

[[insns-vsm3c, SM3 Compression]]
= vsm3c.vi

Synopsis::
Vector SM3 Compression

Mnemonic::
vsm3c.vi vd, vs2, uimm

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101011'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd   | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Current state {H,G.F,E,D,C,B,A}
| uimm | input  | -    | - | -  | round number (rnds)
| Vs2  | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words {-,-,w[5],w[4],-,-,w[1],w[0]}
| Vd   | output | 256  | 8 | 32 | Next state {H,G.F,E,D,C,B,A}
|===

Description::
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

Performs 2 rounds of SM3 Compression, producing eight 32-bit outputs in
a 256-bit 8-element group.

The round number is provided by the unsigned 5-bit `rnds` unsigned immediate. Legal values are 0 - 31
and indicate which group of two rounds are being performed. For example, if rnds=1,
then rounds 2 and 3 are being performed.

[NOTE]
====
The round number is used in the rotation of the constant as well to inform the
behavior which differs between rounds 0-15, and rounds 16-63.
====

It treats each 256-bit 8-element group of `vd` as eight 32-bit words,
and each 256-bit 8-element group of `vs2` as eight 32-bit words. Only 4 of these words are consumed by
this instruction, the rest are don't-cares.

[NOTE]
====
To align with the SM3 specification, we byte swap the inputs from big-endian to little-endian,
we perform the operations in little-endian, 
and then we byte swap the output from little endian to big endian.
====

The elements are listed here in the order they appear in the register, with the most significant
element on the left, and the least significant on the right.

vs2 = {w[7], w[6], w[5], w[4], w[3], w[2], w[1], w[0]}

The values consumed by the instruction are

vs2 = {- , - , w[5], w[4], -, -, w[1], w[0]}

Where the "-" characters are not consumed and are therefore don't cares.

This instruction consumes the "W" message schedule inputs and internally generates the "W'" values as needed

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

The case where the `vd` register group overlap with `vs2` is _reserved_.

[NOTE]
====
Preventing overlap between `vd` and `vs2` simplifies implementation with `VLEN < EGW` while not impacting larger VLEN since it does not make sense to reuse a register group for both message words and current state.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VSM3C(rnds, vs2, vd)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {

  // load state
  let {Hi, Gi, Fi, Ei, Di, Ci, Bi, Ai} : bits(256) : bits(256) = (get_velem(vd, 256, i));
  //load message schedule
  let {u_w7, u_w6, w5i, w4i, u_w3, u_w2, w1i, w0i} : bits(256) = (get_velem(vs2, 256, i));
  // u_w inputs are unused

// perform endian swap
let H : bits(32) = rev8(Hi);
let G : bits(32) = rev8(Gi);
let F : bits(32) = rev8(Fi);
let E : bits(32) = rev8(Ei);
let D : bits(32) = rev8(Di);
let C : bits(32) = rev8(Ci);
let B : bits(32) = rev8(Bi);
let A : bits(32) = rev8(Ai);

let w5 = : bits(32) rev8(w5i);
let w4 = : bits(32) rev8(w4i);
let w1 = : bits(32) rev8(w1i);
let w0 = : bits(32) rev8(w0i);

let x0 :bits(32) = w0 ^ w4;  // W'[0]
let x1 :bits(32) = w1 ^ w5;  // W'[1]

let j = 2 * rnds;
let ss1 : bits(32) = ROL32(ROL32(A, 12) + E + ROL32(T_j(j), j % 32), 7);
let ss2 : bits(32) = ss1 ^ ROL32(A, 12);
let tt1 : bits(32) = FF_j(A, B, C, j) + D + ss2 + x0;
let tt2 : bits(32) = GG_j(E, F, G, j) + H + ss1 + w0;
D = C;
let : bits(32) C1 = ROL32(B, 9);
B = A;
let A1 : bits(32) = tt1;
H = G;
let G1 : bits(32) = ROL32(F, 19);
F = E;
let E1 : bits(32) = P_0(tt2);

j = 2 * rnds + 1;
ss1 = ROL32(ROL32(A1, 12) + E1 + ROL32(T_j(j), j % 32), 7);
ss2 = ss1 ^ ROL32(A1, 12);
tt1 = FF_j(A1, B, C1, j) + D + ss2 + x1;
tt2 = GG_j(E1, F, G1, j) + H + ss1 + w1;
D = C1;
let C2 : bits(32) = ROL32(B, 9);
B = A1;
let A2 : bits(32) = tt1;
H = G1;
let G2 = : bits(32) ROL32(F, 19);
F = E1;
let E2 = : bits(32) P_0(tt2);

// Update the destination register - swap back to big endian
let result : bits(256) = {rev8(G1), rev8(G2), rev8(E1), rev8(E2), rev8(C1), rev8(C2), rev8(A1), rev8(A2)};
set_velem(vd, 256, i, result);
      }

RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function FF1(X, Y, Z) = ((X) ^ (Y) ^ (Z))
function FF2(X, Y, Z) = (((X) & (Y)) | ((X) & (Z)) | ((Y) & (Z)))

function FF_j(X, Y, Z, J) = (((J) <= 15) ? FF1(X, Y, Z) : FF2(X, Y, Z))

function GG1(X, Y, Z) = ((X) ^ (Y) ^ (Z))
function GG2(X, Y, Z) = (((X) & (Y)) | ((~(X)) & (Z)))
.
function GG_j(X, Y, Z, J) = (((J) <= 15) ? GG1(X, Y, Z) : GG2(X, Y, Z))

function T_j(J) = (((J) <= 15) ? (0x79CC4519) : (0x7A879D8A))

function P_0(X) = ((X) ^ ROL32((X),  9) ^ ROL32((X), 17))

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvksh>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Cleanup
Created a Reserved Encodings section for all instructions that have reserved encodings.
Improved consistency of instruction descriptions text.
riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups - toned down warnings about large LMULs and moved all into a non-normative note.
riscv-crypto-spec-vector - removed the definition of data-independent execution latency and pointed the reader to the Scalar Crypto Extensions Specification

doc/vector/insns/vsm3c.adoc, after:

[[insns-vsm3c, SM3 Compression]]
= vsm3c.vi

Synopsis::
Vector SM3 Compression

Mnemonic::
vsm3c.vi vd, vs2, uimm

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101011'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32
*The `vd` register group overlaps with the `vs2` register group

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd   | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Current state {H,G.F,E,D,C,B,A}
| uimm | input  | -    | - | -  | round number (rnds)
| Vs2  | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words {-,-,w[5],w[4],-,-,w[1],w[0]}
| Vd   | output | 256  | 8 | 32 | Next state {H,G.F,E,D,C,B,A}
|===

Description::
Performs 2 rounds of SM3 Compression, producing eight 32-bit outputs in
a 256-bit 8-element group.

The round number is provided by the unsigned 5-bit `rnds` unsigned immediate. Legal values are 0 - 31
and indicate which group of two rounds are being performed. For example, if rnds=1,
then rounds 2 and 3 are being performed.

[NOTE]
====
The round number is used in the rotation of the constant as well to inform the
behavior which differs between rounds 0-15, and rounds 16-63.
====

It treats each 256-bit 8-element group of `vd` as eight 32-bit words,
and each 256-bit 8-element group of `vs2` as eight 32-bit words. Only 4 of these words are consumed by
this instruction, the rest are don't-cares.

[NOTE]
====
To align with the SM3 specification, we byte swap the inputs from big-endian to little-endian,
we perform the operations in little-endian, 
and then we byte swap the output from little endian to big endian.
====

The elements are listed here in the order they appear in the register, with the most significant
element on the left, and the least significant on the right.

vs2 = {w[7], w[6], w[5], w[4], w[3], w[2], w[1], w[0]}

The values consumed by the instruction are

vs2 = {- , - , w[5], w[4], -, -, w[1], w[0]}

Where the "-" characters are not consumed and are therefore don't cares.

This instruction consumes the "W" message schedule inputs and internally generates the "W'" values as needed

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[NOTE]
====
Preventing overlap between `vd` and `vs2` simplifies implementation with `VLEN < EGW` while not impacting larger VLEN since it does not make sense to reuse a register group for both message words and current state.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VSM3C(rnds, vs2, vd)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {

  // load state
  let {Hi, Gi, Fi, Ei, Di, Ci, Bi, Ai} : bits(256) : bits(256) = (get_velem(vd, 256, i));
  //load message schedule
  let {u_w7, u_w6, w5i, w4i, u_w3, u_w2, w1i, w0i} : bits(256) = (get_velem(vs2, 256, i));
  // u_w inputs are unused

// perform endian swap
let H : bits(32) = rev8(Hi);
let G : bits(32) = rev8(Gi);
let F : bits(32) = rev8(Fi);
let E : bits(32) = rev8(Ei);
let D : bits(32) = rev8(Di);
let C : bits(32) = rev8(Ci);
let B : bits(32) = rev8(Bi);
let A : bits(32) = rev8(Ai);

let w5 = : bits(32) rev8(w5i);
let w4 = : bits(32) rev8(w4i);
let w1 = : bits(32) rev8(w1i);
let w0 = : bits(32) rev8(w0i);

let x0 :bits(32) = w0 ^ w4;  // W'[0]
let x1 :bits(32) = w1 ^ w5;  // W'[1]

let j = 2 * rnds;
let ss1 : bits(32) = ROL32(ROL32(A, 12) + E + ROL32(T_j(j), j % 32), 7);
let ss2 : bits(32) = ss1 ^ ROL32(A, 12);
let tt1 : bits(32) = FF_j(A, B, C, j) + D + ss2 + x0;
let tt2 : bits(32) = GG_j(E, F, G, j) + H + ss1 + w0;
D = C;
let : bits(32) C1 = ROL32(B, 9);
B = A;
let A1 : bits(32) = tt1;
H = G;
let G1 : bits(32) = ROL32(F, 19);
F = E;
let E1 : bits(32) = P_0(tt2);

j = 2 * rnds + 1;
ss1 = ROL32(ROL32(A1, 12) + E1 + ROL32(T_j(j), j % 32), 7);
ss2 = ss1 ^ ROL32(A1, 12);
tt1 = FF_j(A1, B, C1, j) + D + ss2 + x1;
tt2 = GG_j(E1, F, G1, j) + H + ss1 + w1;
D = C1;
let C2 : bits(32) = ROL32(B, 9);
B = A1;
let A2 : bits(32) = tt1;
H = G1;
let G2 = : bits(32) ROL32(F, 19);
F = E1;
let E2 = : bits(32) P_0(tt2);

// Update the destination register - swap back to big endian
let result : bits(256) = {rev8(G1), rev8(G2), rev8(E1), rev8(E2), rev8(C1), rev8(C2), rev8(A1), rev8(A2)};
set_velem(vd, 256, i, result);
      }

RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function FF1(X, Y, Z) = ((X) ^ (Y) ^ (Z))
function FF2(X, Y, Z) = (((X) & (Y)) | ((X) & (Z)) | ((Y) & (Z)))

function FF_j(X, Y, Z, J) = (((J) <= 15) ? FF1(X, Y, Z) : FF2(X, Y, Z))

function GG1(X, Y, Z) = ((X) ^ (Y) ^ (Z))
function GG2(X, Y, Z) = (((X) & (Y)) | ((~(X)) & (Z)))
.
function GG_j(X, Y, Z, J) = (((J) <= 15) ? GG1(X, Y, Z) : GG2(X, Y, Z))

function T_j(J) = (((J) <= 15) ? (0x79CC4519) : (0x7A879D8A))

function P_0(X) = ((X) ^ ROL32((X),  9) ^ ROL32((X), 17))

--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvksh>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
