doc/vector/insns/vsm3me.adoc, before:

[[insns-vsm3me, SM3 Message Expansion]]
= vsm3me.vv

Synopsis::
Vector SM3 Message Expansion - 8 rounds per instruction

Mnemonic::
vsm3me.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '100000'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words W[7:0]
| Vs2 | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words W[15:8]
| Vd  | output | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words W[23:16]
|===

Description::
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

This instruction implements 8 rounds of SM3 message expansion,  producing eight 32-bit
outputs in a 256-bit 8-element group.
It treats each 256-bit 8-element group of `vs1` and `vs2` as the data input.

[NOTE]
====
To align with the SM3 specification, we byte swap the inputs from big-endian to little-endian,
we perform the operations in little-endian, 
and then we byte swap the output from little endian to big endian.
====

[NOTE]
====
For the best performance, it is recommended that implementations have VLEN>=256.
When VLEN<EGW, an appropriate LMUL needs to be used by software so that elements from the 
specified register groups can be combined to form the full element group.
====

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

The case where the `vd` register group overlaps with `vs2` is _reserved_.

[NOTE]
====
Preventing overlap between `vd` and `vs2` simplifies implementations with `VLEN < EGW`.
This restriction should not have any coding impact since the algorithm requires these
values to be preserved for generating the next 8 words.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VSM3ME(vs2, vs1)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let w[7:0]  : bits(256) = get_velem(vs1, 256, i);
    let w[15:8] : bits(256) = get_velem(vs2, 256, i);
    
    // Byte Swap inputs from big-endian to little-endian
    let w15 = rev8(w[15]);
    let w14 = rev8(w[14]);
    let w13 = rev8(w[13]);
    let w12 = rev8(w[12]);
    let w11 = rev8(w[11]);
    let w10 = rev8(w[10]);
    let w9  = rev8(w[9]);
    let w8  = rev8(w[8]);
    let w7  = rev8(w[7]);
    let w6  = rev8(w[6]);
    let w5  = rev8(w[5]);
    let w4  = rev8(w[4]);
    let w3  = rev8(w[3]);
    let w2  = rev8(w[2]);
    let w1  = rev8(w[1]);
    let w0  = rev8(w[0]);

    // Arguments are W[i-16], W[i-9], W[i-3], W[i-13], W[i-6].
    // Note that some of the newly computed words are used in later invocations.
    let w[16] = ZVKSH_W(w0,  w7, w13,  w3, w10);
    let w[17] = ZVKSH_W(w1,  w8, w14,  w4, w11);
    let w[18] = ZVKSH_W(w2,  w9, w15,  w5, w12);
    let w[19] = ZVKSH_W(w3, w10, w16,  w6, w13);
    let w[20] = ZVKSH_W(w4, w11, w17,  w7, w14);
    let w[21] = ZVKSH_W(w5, w12, w18,  w8, w15);
    let w[22] = ZVKSH_W(w6, w13, w19,  w9, w16);
    let w[23] = ZVKSH_W(w7, w14, w20, w10, w17);

  // Byte swap outputs from little-endian back to big-endian
    let w16 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[16]);
    let w17 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[17]);
    let w18 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[18]);
    let w19 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[19]);
    let w20 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[20]);
    let w21 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[21]);
    let w22 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[22]);
    let w23 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[23]);


    // Update the destination register.
    set_velem(vd, 256, i, {w23, w22, w21, w20, w19, w18, w17, w16});
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

  function P_1(X) ((X) ^ ROL32((X), 15) ^ ROL32((X), 23))

  function ZVKSH_W(M16, M9, M3, M13, M6) = \
  (P1( (M16) ^  (M9) ^ ROL32((M3), 15) ) ^ ROL32((M13), 7) ^ (M6))
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvksh>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Cleanup
Created a Reserved Encodings section for all instructions that have reserved encodings.
Improved consistency of instruction descriptions text.
riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups - toned down warnings about large LMULs and moved all into a non-normative note.
riscv-crypto-spec-vector - removed the definition of data-independent execution latency and pointed the reader to the Scalar Crypto Extensions Specification

doc/vector/insns/vsm3me.adoc, after:

[[insns-vsm3me, SM3 Message Expansion]]
= vsm3me.vv

Synopsis::
Vector SM3 Message Expansion - 8 rounds per instruction

Mnemonic::
vsm3me.vv vd, vs2, vs1

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '100000'},
]}
....
Reserved Encodings::
* `SEW` is any value other than 32

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words W[7:0]
| Vs2 | input  | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words W[15:8]
| Vd  | output | 256  | 8 | 32 | Message words W[23:16]
|===

Description::
This instruction implements 8 rounds of SM3 message expansion.

It produces eight 32-bit outputs in a 256-bit 8-element group.
It treats each 256-bit 8-element group of `vs1` and `vs2` as the data input.

[NOTE]
====
To align with the SM3 specification, we byte swap the inputs from big-endian to little-endian,
we perform the operations in little-endian, 
and then we byte swap the output from little endian to big endian.
====

[NOTE]
====
For the best performance, it is recommended that implementations have VLEN>=256.
When VLEN<EGW, an appropriate LMUL needs to be used by software so that elements from the 
specified register groups can be combined to form the full element group.
====

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

The case where the `vd` register group overlaps with `vs2` is _reserved_.

[NOTE]
====
Preventing overlap between `vd` and `vs2` simplifies implementations with `VLEN < EGW`.
This restriction should not have any coding impact since the algorithm requires these
values to be preserved for generating the next 8 words.
====

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VSM3ME(vs2, vs1)) = {
  assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let w[7:0]  : bits(256) = get_velem(vs1, 256, i);
    let w[15:8] : bits(256) = get_velem(vs2, 256, i);
    
    // Byte Swap inputs from big-endian to little-endian
    let w15 = rev8(w[15]);
    let w14 = rev8(w[14]);
    let w13 = rev8(w[13]);
    let w12 = rev8(w[12]);
    let w11 = rev8(w[11]);
    let w10 = rev8(w[10]);
    let w9  = rev8(w[9]);
    let w8  = rev8(w[8]);
    let w7  = rev8(w[7]);
    let w6  = rev8(w[6]);
    let w5  = rev8(w[5]);
    let w4  = rev8(w[4]);
    let w3  = rev8(w[3]);
    let w2  = rev8(w[2]);
    let w1  = rev8(w[1]);
    let w0  = rev8(w[0]);

    // Arguments are W[i-16], W[i-9], W[i-3], W[i-13], W[i-6].
    // Note that some of the newly computed words are used in later invocations.
    let w[16] = ZVKSH_W(w0,  w7, w13,  w3, w10);
    let w[17] = ZVKSH_W(w1,  w8, w14,  w4, w11);
    let w[18] = ZVKSH_W(w2,  w9, w15,  w5, w12);
    let w[19] = ZVKSH_W(w3, w10, w16,  w6, w13);
    let w[20] = ZVKSH_W(w4, w11, w17,  w7, w14);
    let w[21] = ZVKSH_W(w5, w12, w18,  w8, w15);
    let w[22] = ZVKSH_W(w6, w13, w19,  w9, w16);
    let w[23] = ZVKSH_W(w7, w14, w20, w10, w17);

  // Byte swap outputs from little-endian back to big-endian
    let w16 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[16]);
    let w17 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[17]);
    let w18 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[18]);
    let w19 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[19]);
    let w20 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[20]);
    let w21 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[21]);
    let w22 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[22]);
    let w23 : Bits(32) = rev8(W[23]);


    // Update the destination register.
    set_velem(vd, 256, i, {w23, w22, w21, w20, w19, w18, w17, w16});
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

  function P_1(X) ((X) ^ ROL32((X), 15) ^ ROL32((X), 23))

  function ZVKSH_W(M16, M9, M3, M13, M6) = \
  (P1( (M16) ^  (M9) ^ ROL32((M3), 15) ) ^ ROL32((M13), 7) ^ (M6))
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvksh>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
