doc/vector/insns/vsm4r.adoc, before:

[[insns-vsm4r, SM4 Rounds]]
= vsm4r.vv

Synopsis::
Vector SM4 Rounds

Mnemonic::
vsm4r.vv vd, vs2

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '10000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|EEW
|Definition

| Vd   | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current state X[0:3]
| Vs2  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current 4 round keys rk[0:3]
| Vd   | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Next state X'[0:3]
|===

Description::
This instruction implements 4 rounds of SM4 Encryption/Decryption, producing four 32-bit outputs in
a 128-bit 4-element group.
It treats each 128-bit 4-element group of `vs2` as the four round keys and
each 128-bit 4-element group of `vs2` as the data input.

vd (in) = {x[i-4], X[i-3]. X[i-2], X[i-1]} +
vs2 = {rk[i-4],rk[i-3], rk[i-2], rk[i-1]} +
vd (out) = {x[i], X[i+1], X[i+2], X[i+3]} +

For example, if i=4 +
vd (in) = {x[0], X[1], X[2], X[3]} +
vs2 = {rk[0],rk[1], rk[2], rk[3]} +
vd (out) = {x[4], X[5], X[6], X[7]} +

The SM4 standard is available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/id/draft-crypto-sm4-00

[NOTE]
====
In SM4, encryption and decryption are identical except that decryption consumes the round keys in the reverse order.
====

Each round is produced by the following +
  B = (X[i-3] &#8853; X[i-2] &#8853; X[i-1] &#8853; rk[i-4]) +
  S = subBytes(B); 1 s-box per byte +
  X[i]= X[i-4] &#8853; S &#8853; ROL2(S) &#8853; ROL10(S) &#8853; ROL18(S) &#8853; ROL24(S) +

Each of the 32 rounds consumes the last 4 32-bit outputs with a round key and produces the next 32-bit output.

NB: The rounds start with i=4 as {X[3],x[2],X[1],X[0]} is the initial data input to the round function
and rk[0] is the initial round key.

This instruction treats `EEW=32` and `EGS=4`, regardless of `vtype.vsew`
`vl` needs to be set to four times the number of element groups.
If vstart is not zero, it needs to be scaled similarly.

Operation::
[source,pseudocode]
--
function clause execute (VSM4R(vd, vs2)) = {
   assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let (rk0, rk1, rk2, rk3) : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i);
    let (X0, X1, X2, X3) : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);

    // 1st round
    B = (X1 ^ X2 ^ X3 ^ rk0)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    let Y0 : bits(32) = X0 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    // 2nd round
    B = (X2 ^ X3 ^ X4 ^ rk1)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    Y1= X1 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    //3rd round
    B = (X3 ^ Y0 ^ X1 ^ rk2)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    Y2= X2 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    //4th round
    B = (Y0 ^ Y1 ^ Y2 ^ rk3)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    Y3= X3 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, (Y0, Y1, Y2, Y3));
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvksed>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Updated instructions so that they depend on SEW
Until now, most cryptographic instructions ignored SEW and operated on their defined EEW. This didn't seem to add any benefit, so the additional complexity that it imposed was not justifiable.

doc/vector/insns/vsm4r.adoc, after:

[[insns-vsm4r, SM4 Rounds]]
= vsm4r.vv

Synopsis::
Vector SM4 Rounds

Mnemonic::
vsm4r.vv vd, vs2

Encoding::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-P'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPMVV'},
{bits: 5, name: '10000'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: '1'},
{bits: 6, name: '101000'},
]}
....

Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EGW
|EGS
|SEW
|Definition

| Vd   | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current state X[0:3]
| Vs2  | input  | 128  | 4 | 32 | Current 4 round keys rk[0:3]
| Vd   | output | 128  | 4 | 32 | Next state X'[0:3]
|===

Description::
`SEW` must be 32, otherwise the instruction encoding is reserved.

This instruction implements 4 rounds of SM4 Encryption/Decryption, producing four 32-bit outputs in
a 128-bit 4-element group.
It treats each 128-bit 4-element group of `vs2` as the four round keys and
each 128-bit 4-element group of `vs2` as the data input.

vd (in) = {x[i-4], X[i-3]. X[i-2], X[i-1]} +
vs2 = {rk[i-4],rk[i-3], rk[i-2], rk[i-1]} +
vd (out) = {x[i], X[i+1], X[i+2], X[i+3]} +

For example, if i=4 +
vd (in) = {x[0], X[1], X[2], X[3]} +
vs2 = {rk[0],rk[1], rk[2], rk[3]} +
vd (out) = {x[4], X[5], X[6], X[7]} +

The SM4 standard is available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/id/draft-crypto-sm4-00

[NOTE]
====
In SM4, encryption and decryption are identical except that decryption consumes the round keys in the reverse order.
====

Each round is produced by the following +
  B = (X[i-3] &#8853; X[i-2] &#8853; X[i-1] &#8853; rk[i-4]) +
  S = subBytes(B); 1 s-box per byte +
  X[i]= X[i-4] &#8853; S &#8853; ROL2(S) &#8853; ROL10(S) &#8853; ROL18(S) &#8853; ROL24(S) +

Each of the 32 rounds consumes the last 4 32-bit outputs with a round key and produces the next 32-bit output.

NB: The rounds start with i=4 as {X[3],x[2],X[1],X[0]} is the initial data input to the round function
and rk[0] is the initial round key.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

Operation::
[source,pseudocode]
--
function clause execute (VSM4R(vd, vs2)) = {
   assert((vl%EGS)<>0)       // vl must be a multiple of EGS
  assert((vstart%EGS)<>0) //  vstart must be a multiple of EGS

  eg_len = (vl/EGS)
  eg_start = (vstart/EGS)
  
  foreach (i from eg_start to eg_len-1) {
    let (rk0, rk1, rk2, rk3) : bits(128) = get_velem(vs2, EGW=128, i);
    let (X0, X1, X2, X3) : bits(128) = get_velem(vd, EGW=128, i);

    // 1st round
    B = (X1 ^ X2 ^ X3 ^ rk0)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    let Y0 : bits(32) = X0 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    // 2nd round
    B = (X2 ^ X3 ^ X4 ^ rk1)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    Y1= X1 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    //3rd round
    B = (X3 ^ Y0 ^ X1 ^ rk2)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    Y2= X2 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    //4th round
    B = (Y0 ^ Y1 ^ Y2 ^ rk3)
    S = sm4_subword(B); 1 s-box per byte
    Y3= X3 ^ S ^ ROL(S,2)^ ROL(S,10)^ ROL(S,18) ^ ROL(S,24)
    set_velem(vd, EGW=128, i, (Y0, Y1, Y2, Y3));
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvksed>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
