doc/vector/insns/vwsll.adoc, before:

[[insns-vwsll, Vector Widening Shift Left Logical]]
= vwsll.[vv,vx,vi]

Synopsis::
Vector widening shift left logical by vector/scalar/immediate.

Mnemonic::
vwsll.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vwsll.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm +
vwsll.vi vd, vs2, uimm, vm

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '110101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '110101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Immediate)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVI'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm[4:0]'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '110101'},
]}
....

Vector-Vector Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | Shift amount
| Vs2 | input  | Data
| Vd  | output | Shifted data 
|===

Vector-Scalar/Immediate Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EEW
|Definition

| Rs1/imm | input  | SEW   | Shift amount
| Vs2     | input  | SEW   | Data
| Vd      | output | 2*SEW | Shifted data
|===


Description:: 
A widening logical shift left is performed on each element of `vs2`.

The elements in `vs2` are shifted left by the shift amount specified by either 
the corresponding elements of `vs1` (vector-vector), integer register `rs1`
(vector-scalar), or an immediate value (vector-immediate).
Only the low log2(2*`SEW`) bits of the shift-amount value are used, all other
bits are ignored.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VWSLL_VV(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=2*SEW, i,
      get_velem(vs2, i) << (get_velem(vs1, i) & ((2*SEW)-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VWSLL_VX(vs2, rs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=2*SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) << (X(rs1) & ((2*SEW)-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VWSLL_VI(vs2, uimm[4:0], vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=2*SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) << (uimm[4:0] & ((2*SEW)-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvbb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===

Commit message:

Clarify that vwsll zero-extends the vs2 operand
This follows from the SAIL code and arguably from the instruction's
mnemonic, but make it explicit for readers' benefit.

doc/vector/insns/vwsll.adoc, after:

[[insns-vwsll, Vector Widening Shift Left Logical]]
= vwsll.[vv,vx,vi]

Synopsis::
Vector widening shift left logical by vector/scalar/immediate.

Mnemonic::
vwsll.vv vd, vs2, vs1, vm +
vwsll.vx vd, vs2, rs1, vm +
vwsll.vi vd, vs2, uimm, vm

Encoding (Vector-Vector)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVV'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '110101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Scalar)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVX'},
{bits: 5, name: 'rs1'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '110101'},
]}
....

Encoding (Vector-Immediate)::
[wavedrom, , svg]
....
{reg:[
{bits: 7, name: 'OP-V'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vd'},
{bits: 3, name: 'OPIVI'},
{bits: 5, name: 'uimm[4:0]'},
{bits: 5, name: 'vs2'},
{bits: 1, name: 'vm'},
{bits: 6, name: '110101'},
]}
....

Vector-Vector Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|Definition

| Vs1 | input  | Shift amount
| Vs2 | input  | Data
| Vd  | output | Shifted data 
|===

Vector-Scalar/Immediate Arguments::

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="4,2,2,2"]
|===
|Register
|Direction
|EEW
|Definition

| Rs1/imm | input  | SEW   | Shift amount
| Vs2     | input  | SEW   | Data
| Vd      | output | 2*SEW | Shifted data
|===


Description:: 
A widening logical shift left is performed on each element of `vs2`.

The elements in `vs2` are zero-extended to 2*`SEW` bits, then shifted left
by the shift amount specified by either
the corresponding elements of `vs1` (vector-vector), integer register `rs1`
(vector-scalar), or an immediate value (vector-immediate).
Only the low log2(2*`SEW`) bits of the shift-amount value are used, all other
bits are ignored.

Operation::
[source,sail]
--
function clause execute (VWSLL_VV(vs2, vs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=2*SEW, i,
      get_velem(vs2, i) << (get_velem(vs1, i) & ((2*SEW)-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VWSLL_VX(vs2, rs1, vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=2*SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) << (X(rs1) & ((2*SEW)-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}

function clause execute (VWSLL_VI(vs2, uimm[4:0], vd)) = {
  foreach (i from vstart to vl - 1) {
    set_velem(vd, EEW=2*SEW, i, 
      get_velem(vs2, i) << (uimm[4:0] & ((2*SEW)-1))
    )
  }
  RETIRE_SUCCESS
}
--

Included in::
[%header,cols="4,2,2"]
|===
|Extension
|Minimum version
|Lifecycle state

| <<zvbb>>
| v0.1.0
| In Development
|===
