doc/vector/riscv-crypto-spec-vector.adoc, before:

[[riscv-doc-template]]
= RISC-V Cryptography Extensions Volume II: Vector Instructions
:description: The vector cryptography extensions for the RISC-V ISA.
:company: RISC-V.org
:revdate:  05 January, 2023
:revnumber: v0.1.0
// :revremark: This document is in development. Some changes should be expected.
:url-riscv: http://riscv.org
:doctype: book
//:doctype: report
:preface-title: Preamble
:colophon:
:appendix-caption: Appendix
:imagesdir: images
:title-logo-image: image:risc-v_logo.png[pdfwidth=3.25in,align=center]
//:page-background-image: image:draft.svg[opacity=20%]
//:title-page-background-image: none
//:back-cover-image: image:circuit.png[opacity=25%]
// Settings:
:experimental:
:reproducible:
// needs to be changed? bug discussion started
:WaveDromEditorApp: wavedrom-cli
:imagesoutdir: images
:icons: font
:lang: en
:listing-caption: Listing
:sectnums:
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:source-highlighter: pygments
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:source-highlighter: coderay
endif::[]
:data-uri:
:hide-uri-scheme:
:stem: latexmath
:footnote:
:xrefstyle: short
:bibtex-file: ../riscv-crypto-spec.bib
:bibtex-order: alphabetical
:bibtex-style: ieee

//:This is the preamble.

[colophon]
= Colophon

This document describes the Vector Cryptography extensions to the 
RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture.

This document is _stable_ and limited changes should be
expected.
For more information, see link:http://riscv.org/spec-state[here].

[NOTE]
.Copyright and licensure:
This work is licensed under a
link:http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License]

[NOTE]
.Document Version Information:
====
include::git-commit.adoc[]

See link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto[github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto]
for more information.
====

[acknowledgments]
== Acknowledgments

Contributors to this specification (in alphabetical order)
include: +
Alan Baum,
Barna Ibrahim,
Barry Spinney,
Ben Marshall,
Derek Atkins,
link:mailto:kad@rivosinc.com[Ken Dockser] (Editor),
Markku-Juhani O. Saarinen,
Nicolas Brunie, 
Richard Newell

We are all very grateful to the many other people who have
helped to improve this specification through their comments, reviews,
feedback and questions.

// ------------------------------------------------------------

include::riscv-crypto-vector-introduction.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-vector-audience.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-vector-sail-specifications.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-vector-policies.adoc[]

// ------------------------------------------------------------

include::./riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups.adoc[]
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-scalar-instructions.adoc[]
<<<

// ------------------------------------------------------------


[[crypto_vector_extensions]]
== Extensions Overview

The section introduces all of the  extensions in the Vector Cryptography
Instruction Set Extension Specification.

These Vector Crypto Extensions can be built on any RISC-V base. However, XLEN=32 implementations
will only be able to provide 32 bit values to the .vx vector-scalar instructions. 

With the exception of Zvknhb, each of these Vector Crypto Extensions can be build on _any_ 
base Vector Extension, embedded (Zve*) or application ("V"). Zvknhb requires ELEN=64 and therefore cannot be implemented on a Zve32* base.

While the Zvkb extension can be built on an Zve32* base, the vclmul[h] instructions will not be
supported in such a case as they require SEW=64.

While these Vector Crypto Extensions _can_ be built on implementations with `ELEN<128`, this will
require code to be written with high `LMUL` values which result in too few register groups
available to effectively code the intended algorithms. 
See <<crypto-vector-element-groups>> for more details on vector element groups and the drawbacks of
small `ELEN` values..


[%header,cols="^2,^2,^2"]
|===
|Extension
|min ELEN
|min XLEN

|Zvkns  | 32 | 32 
|Zvknha | 32 | 32
|Zvknhb | 64 | 32
|Zvkb   | 32^1^ | 32^2^
|Zvkg   | 32 | 32
|Zvksed | 32 | 32
|Zvksh  | 32 | 32
|===
1 - When ELEN=32, the clmul[h] instructions are not supported as they are only defined for SEW=64

2 - When XLEN=32, scalar inputs are limited to zero/sign-extended 32-bit values.


All _cryptography-specific_ instructions defined in this Vector Crypto specification (i.e., <<zvkns>>,
<<zvknh,Zvknh[ab]>>, <<Zvkg>>, <<Zvksed>> and <<zvksh>> but _not_ <<zvkb>>) shall be executed with
data-independent execution latency.
That is, the latency of an instruction's execution shall not vary based on the values
of its _data_. To be clear, _data_ refers to an instruction's operands and does not include 
other parameters of vector execution such as those specified in `vtype` and `vl`.
This behavior is the same as described as described in the `Zkt` extension for
scalar instructions. This behavior in these Vector Crypto instructions is independent of the
implementation of the Zkt extension; it does not require that Zkt is implemented.


Detection of individual cryptography extensions uses the
unified software-based RISC-V discovery method.

[NOTE]
====
At the time of writing, these discovery mechanisms are still a work in
progress.
====


include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvkns.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvknh.adoc[]
<<< 
// include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvknf.adoc[]
// <<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvkb.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvkg.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvksed.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvksh.adoc[]
<<<

// ------------------------------------------------------------

[[crypto_vector_insns, reftext="Vector Cryptography Instructions"]]
== Instructions

// include::insns/vaes128k10.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<< 
// include::insns/vaes256k13.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<  
// include::insns/vaes256k14.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
// include::insns/vaesd128.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<< 
// include::insns/vaesd256.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
include::insns/vaesdf.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaesdm.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<   
// include::insns/vaese128.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
// include::insns/vaese256.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
include::insns/vaesef.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaesem.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
// include::insns/vaeskf.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
include::insns/vaeskf1.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaeskf2.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
// include::insns/vaeskr1.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
// include::insns/vaeskr2.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
include::insns/vaesz.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vandn.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vbrev8.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vclmul.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vghmac.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vclmulh.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vrev8.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vrol.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vror.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsha2c.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsha2ms.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm3c.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm3me.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm4k.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm4r.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<

[[bibliography]]
== Bibliography

bibliography::../riscv-crypto-spec.bib[ieee]

[[Encodings]]
== Encodings
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-inst-table.adoc[]
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-inst-table-zvkb.adoc[]


include::./riscv-crypto-vector-appx-sail.adoc[]

Commit message:

Cleanup
Created a Reserved Encodings section for all instructions that have reserved encodings.
Improved consistency of instruction descriptions text.
riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups - toned down warnings about large LMULs and moved all into a non-normative note.
riscv-crypto-spec-vector - removed the definition of data-independent execution latency and pointed the reader to the Scalar Crypto Extensions Specification

doc/vector/riscv-crypto-spec-vector.adoc, after:

[[riscv-doc-template]]
= RISC-V Cryptography Extensions Volume II: Vector Instructions
:description: The vector cryptography extensions for the RISC-V ISA.
:company: RISC-V.org
:revdate:  10 January, 2023
:revnumber: v0.1.1
// :revremark: This document is in development. Some changes should be expected.
:url-riscv: http://riscv.org
:doctype: book
//:doctype: report
:preface-title: Preamble
:colophon:
:appendix-caption: Appendix
:imagesdir: images
:title-logo-image: image:risc-v_logo.png[pdfwidth=3.25in,align=center]
//:page-background-image: image:draft.svg[opacity=20%]
//:title-page-background-image: none
//:back-cover-image: image:circuit.png[opacity=25%]
// Settings:
:experimental:
:reproducible:
// needs to be changed? bug discussion started
:WaveDromEditorApp: wavedrom-cli
:imagesoutdir: images
:icons: font
:lang: en
:listing-caption: Listing
:sectnums:
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:source-highlighter: pygments
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:source-highlighter: coderay
endif::[]
:data-uri:
:hide-uri-scheme:
:stem: latexmath
:footnote:
:xrefstyle: short
:bibtex-file: ../riscv-crypto-spec.bib
:bibtex-order: alphabetical
:bibtex-style: ieee

//:This is the preamble.

[colophon]
= Colophon

This document describes the Vector Cryptography extensions to the 
RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture.

This document is _stable_ and limited changes should be
expected.
For more information, see link:http://riscv.org/spec-state[here].

[NOTE]
.Copyright and licensure:
This work is licensed under a
link:http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License]

[NOTE]
.Document Version Information:
====
include::git-commit.adoc[]

See link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto[github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto]
for more information.
====

[acknowledgments]
== Acknowledgments

Contributors to this specification (in alphabetical order)
include: +
Alan Baum,
Barna Ibrahim,
Barry Spinney,
Ben Marshall,
Derek Atkins,
link:mailto:kad@rivosinc.com[Ken Dockser] (Editor),
Markku-Juhani O. Saarinen,
Nicolas Brunie, 
Richard Newell

We are all very grateful to the many other people who have
helped to improve this specification through their comments, reviews,
feedback and questions.

// ------------------------------------------------------------

include::riscv-crypto-vector-introduction.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-vector-audience.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-vector-sail-specifications.adoc[]
include::riscv-crypto-vector-policies.adoc[]

// ------------------------------------------------------------

include::./riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups.adoc[]
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-scalar-instructions.adoc[]
<<<

// ------------------------------------------------------------


[[crypto_vector_extensions]]
== Extensions Overview

The section introduces all of the  extensions in the Vector Cryptography
Instruction Set Extension Specification.

These Vector Crypto Extensions can be built on any RISC-V base. However, XLEN=32 implementations
will only be able to provide 32 bit values to the .vx vector-scalar instructions. 

With the exception of Zvknhb, each of these Vector Crypto Extensions can be build on _any_ 
base Vector Extension, embedded (Zve*) or application ("V"). Zvknhb requires ELEN=64 and therefore cannot be implemented on a Zve32* base.

While the Zvkb extension can be built on an Zve32* base, the vclmul[h] instructions will not be
supported in such a case as they require SEW=64.

While these Vector Crypto Extensions _can_ be built on implementations with `ELEN<128`, this will
require code to be written with high `LMUL` values which result in too few register groups
available to effectively code the intended algorithms. 
See <<crypto-vector-element-groups>> for more details on vector element groups and the drawbacks of
small `ELEN` values..


[%header,cols="^2,^2,^2"]
|===
|Extension
|min ELEN
|min XLEN

|Zvkns  | 32 | 32 
|Zvknha | 32 | 32
|Zvknhb | 64 | 32
|Zvkb   | 32^1^ | 32^2^
|Zvkg   | 32 | 32
|Zvksed | 32 | 32
|Zvksh  | 32 | 32
|===
1 - When ELEN=32, the clmul[h] instructions are not supported as they are only defined for SEW=64

2 - When XLEN=32, scalar inputs are limited to zero/sign-extended 32-bit values.


All _cryptography-specific_ instructions defined in this Vector Crypto specification (i.e., <<zvkns>>,
<<zvknh,Zvknh[ab]>>, <<Zvkg>>, <<Zvksed>> and <<zvksh>> but _not_ <<zvkb>>) shall be executed with
data-independent execution latency as defined in the 
link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases/tag/v1.0.1-scalar[RISC-V Scalar Cryptography Extensions specification].
It is important to note that the Vector Crypto extensions are independent of the
implementation of the `Zkt` extension and do not require that `Zkt` is implemented.
// That is, the latency of an instruction's execution shall not vary based on the values
// of its _data_. To be clear, _data_ refers to an instruction's operands and does not include 
// other parameters of vector execution such as those specified in `vtype` and `vl`.
// This behavior is the same as described as described in the `Zkt` extension for
// scalar instructions. 



Detection of individual cryptography extensions uses the
unified software-based RISC-V discovery method.

[NOTE]
====
At the time of writing, these discovery mechanisms are still a work in
progress.
====


include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvkns.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvknh.adoc[]
<<< 
// include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvknf.adoc[]
// <<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvkb.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvkg.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvksed.adoc[]
<<<
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-zvksh.adoc[]
<<<

// ------------------------------------------------------------

[[crypto_vector_insns, reftext="Vector Cryptography Instructions"]]
== Instructions

// include::insns/vaes128k10.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<< 
// include::insns/vaes256k13.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<  
// include::insns/vaes256k14.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
// include::insns/vaesd128.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<< 
// include::insns/vaesd256.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
include::insns/vaesdf.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaesdm.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<   
// include::insns/vaese128.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
// include::insns/vaese256.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
// <<<
include::insns/vaesef.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaesem.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaeskf1.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaeskf2.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vaesz.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vandn.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vbrev8.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vclmul.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vclmulh.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vghmac.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vrev8.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vrol.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vror.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsha2c.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsha2ms.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm3c.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm3me.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm4k.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<
include::insns/vsm4r.adoc[leveloffset=+2]
<<<

[[bibliography]]
== Bibliography

bibliography::../riscv-crypto-spec.bib[ieee]

[[Encodings]]
== Encodings
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-inst-table.adoc[]
include::./riscv-crypto-vector-inst-table-zvkb.adoc[]


include::./riscv-crypto-vector-appx-sail.adoc[]
