doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-sail-specifications.adoc, before:

[[crypto_vector_sail_specifications]]
=== Sail Specifications

RISC-V maintains a 
link:https://github.com/riscv/sail-riscv[formal model]
of the ISA specification,
implemented in the Sail ISA specification language
cite:[sail].
Note that _Sail_ refers to the specification language itself,
and that there is a _model of RISC-V_, written using Sail.
It is not correct to refer to "the Sail model".
This is ambiguous, given there are many models of different ISAs implemented
using Sail. We refer to the Sail implementation of RISC-V as
"the RISC-V Sail model".

The Cryptography extension uses inline Sail code snippets from the
actual model to give canonical descriptions of instruction
functionality.
Each instruction is accompanied by its expression in Sail, and includes
calls to supporting functions which are too verbose to include directly
in the specification.
This supporting code is listed in
<<crypto_vector_appx_sail>>.
The 
link:https://github.com/rems-project/sail/blob/sail2/manual.pdf[Sail Manual]
is recommended reading in order to best understand the code snippets.

Note that this document contains only a subset of the formal model: refer to
the formal model Github
link:https://github.com/riscv/sail-riscv[repository]
for the complete model.

Commit message:

Many changes working towards first complete draft.

doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-sail-specifications.adoc, after:

[[crypto_vector_sail_specifications]]
=== Sail Specifications

RISC-V maintains a 
link:https://github.com/riscv/sail-riscv[formal model]
of the ISA specification,
implemented in the Sail ISA specification language
cite:[sail].
Note that _Sail_ refers to the specification language itself,
and that there is a _model of RISC-V_, written using Sail.
It is not correct to refer to "the Sail model".
This is ambiguous, given there are many models of different ISAs implemented
using Sail. We refer to the Sail implementation of RISC-V as
"the RISC-V Sail model".

The Vector Cryptography extensions eventually intend to use inline Sail code snippets from the
actual model to give canonical descriptions of instruction functionality.
However, the Vector Crypto Extensions Sail model will be built on top
of the RISC-V Vector Sail Model which is not yet released. 
For now, each instruction is accompanied by its expression in pseudocode which is intended
to be Sail-like. In many cases the pseudocode includes
calls to supporting functions which are too verbose to include directly
in the specification.
This supporting code is listed in
<<crypto_vector_appx_sail>>.
The 
link:https://github.com/rems-project/sail/blob/sail2/manual.pdf[Sail Manual]
is recommended reading in order to best understand the code snippets.
Also, the
link:https://github.com/billmcspadden-riscv/sail/blob/cookbook_br/cookbook/doc/TheSailCookbook_Complete.pdf[The Sail Programming Language: A Sail Cookbook]
is a good reference that is in the process of being written.

Note that this document will contain only a subset of the formal model: refer to
the formal model Github
link:https://github.com/riscv/sail-riscv[repository]
for the complete model.
