doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-zvknh.adoc, before:

[[zvknh, zvknh[ab]]]
=== `Zvknh[ab]` - NIST Suite: Vector SHA-2 Secure Hash

Instructions for accelerating SHA-2

`SEW` differentiates between SHA-256 (`SEW`=32) and SHA-512 (`SEW`=64).
For SHA-256, these instructions work on 128-bit element groups comprised of four 32-bit elements.
For SHA-256, these instructions work on 256-bit element groups comprised of four 64-bit elements.

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="^2,^2,^2,2"]
|===
|SEW
|EGW
|SHA-2
|Extension

|32 | 128 | SHA-256 | Zvknha, Zvknhb
|64 | 256 | SHA-512 | Zvknhb
|===

[NOTE]
====
If Zvknhb is implemented, `SEW` is used to differentiate between SHA-256 (SEW=32) and SHA-512 (SEW=64).
If Zvknha is implemented, only SHA-256 is supported, and SEW must be 32.
====

For SHA-256, implementations with VLEN < 128 require software to use LMUL>1 to combine
32-bit elements from register groups to provide all four elements of the element group.

For SHA-512, implementations with VLEN < 256 require software to use LMUL>1 to combine
64-bit elements from register groups to provide all four elements of the element group.

To help avoid side-channel timing attacks, these instructions shall be implemented with data-independent timing.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="2,4"]
|===
// |`VLENmin`
|Mnemonic
|Instruction

// | 128
| vsha2ms.vv   | <<insns-vsha2ms>>
// | 128
| vsha2c[hl].vv    | <<insns-vsha2c>>
|===

Commit message:

Instruction descriptions are re-written to be more concise.

doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-zvknh.adoc, after:

[[zvknh, zvknh[ab]]]
=== `Zvknh[ab]` - NIST Suite: Vector SHA-2 Secure Hash

Instructions for accelerating SHA-2

`SEW` differentiates between SHA-256 (`SEW`=32) and SHA-512 (`SEW`=64).
For SHA-256, these instructions work on 128-bit element groups comprised of four 32-bit elements.
For SHA-256, these instructions work on 256-bit element groups comprised of four 64-bit elements.

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="^2,^2,^2,2"]
|===
|SEW
|EGW
|SHA-2
|Extension

|32 | 128 | SHA-256 | Zvknha, Zvknhb
|64 | 256 | SHA-512 | Zvknhb
|===

These instruction accelerate the SHA-2 hash standard as defined in
link:https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.180-4[FIPS PUB 180-4 Secure Hash Standard (SHS)])

[NOTE]
====
If Zvknhb is implemented, `SEW` is used to differentiate between SHA-256 (SEW=32) and SHA-512 (SEW=64).
If Zvknha is implemented, only SHA-256 is supported, and SEW must be 32.
====

For SHA-256, implementations with VLEN < 128 require software to use LMUL>1 to combine
32-bit elements from register groups to provide all four elements of the element group.

For SHA-512, implementations with VLEN < 256 require software to use LMUL>1 to combine
64-bit elements from register groups to provide all four elements of the element group.

To help avoid side-channel timing attacks, these instructions shall be implemented with data-independent timing.

[NOTE]
====
It is recommended that implementations have VLEN≥128 for these instructions.
Furthermore, for the best performance in SHA512, it is recommended that implementations have VLEN≥256.
When VLEN<EGW, an appropriate LMUL needs to be used by software so that elements from the 
specified register groups can be combined to form the full element group.
====

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="2,4"]
|===
// |`VLENmin`
|Mnemonic
|Instruction

// | 128
| vsha2ms.vv   | <<insns-vsha2ms>>
// | 128
| vsha2c[hl].vv    | <<insns-vsha2c>>
|===
