doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-scalar-instructions.adoc, before:

[[crypto-vector-scalar-instructions]]
=== Crypto Vector-Scalar Instructions

The RISC-V Vector Extension defines three encodings for Vector-Scalar operations which get their scalar operand from a GPR or FP register:

- OPIVX: Scalar GPR _x_ register
- OPFVF: Scalar FP _f_ register
- OPMVX: Scalar GPR _x_ register

However, the Vector Extensions include Vector Reduction Operations which can also be considered
Vector-Scalar operations because a scalar operand is provided from element 0 of
vector register `vs1`. The vector operand is provided in vector register group `vs2`.
These reduction operations all use the `.vs` suffix in their mnemonics. Additionally, the reduction operations all produce a scalar result in element 0 of the destination register, `vd`.

For the vector crypto extensions, we have defined Vector-Scalar instructions that are similar to these
Vector Reduction Operations in that they get a scalar operand from a vector register. However, they differ
from the Reduction Operations in that they get a scalar element group
(see link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec/blob/master/element_groups.adoc[RISC-V Vector Element Groups])
from `vs2` and they return _vector_ results to `vd`, which is also a source vector operand.
These Vector-Scalar crypto instructions also use the `.vs` suffix in their mnemonics.

[NOTE]
====
We chose to use `vs2` as the scalar operand, and vd as the vector operand, so that we could use the `vs1`
specifier as additional encoding bits for these instructions. This allows these instructions to have a
much smaller encoding footprint, leaving more rooms for other instructions in the future.
====

These instructions enable a single key, specified as a single element group in `vs2`, to be
applied to each element group of a vector of element groups in `vd`.

[NOTE]
====
It is common for multiple AES encryption rounds (for example) to be performed in parallel with the same
round key (e.g. in counter modes).
Rather than having to first splat the common key across the whole vector group, these vector-scalar
crypto instructions allow the round key to be specified as a scalar element group.
====

// In the case of AES256 all-rounds instructions we need to provide two 128-bit keys; one is held in `vs1` and
// the other is held in `vs2`. The 128-bit data to be processed is held in `vd`.
// A vector-scalar form of this instruction looks different from the existing vector-scalar instructions in that
// both `vs1` and `vs2` are treated as scalar operands that apply to the vector operands of `vd`. 

// [NOTE]
// ====
// Previously, the AES and SM4 instructions that performed rounds operations (including AES all-rounds instructions)
// were defined to be destructive operations where the data source was provided in `vd` and the key was provided in
// `vs2`. With the advent of the new crypto vector-scalar instructions, we are changing these instructions
// to use `vs1` for the key and `vs2` for the data.
// In the case of vector-scalar instructions, the scalar key will be held in
// element group 0 of `vs1` . This is done to remain consistent with the use of `vs1` for the scalar element in
// all of the existing vector-scalar operations as well as the vector reduction operations. 
// ====

Commit message:

Added Software portability section, formatting, cleanup and clarification
vaesdf - removed extraneous formatting of description
instruction-constraints - added tables for clarity
vector-scalar instructions - clarified that scalar element groups are not restricted to a single register

doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-scalar-instructions.adoc, after:

[[crypto-vector-scalar-instructions]]
=== Vector-Scalar Instructions

The RISC-V Vector Extension defines three encodings for Vector-Scalar operations which get their scalar operand from a GPR or FP register:

- OPIVX: Scalar GPR _x_ register
- OPFVF: Scalar FP _f_ register
- OPMVX: Scalar GPR _x_ register

However, the Vector Extensions include Vector Reduction Operations which can also be considered
Vector-Scalar operations because a scalar operand is provided from element 0 of
vector register `vs1`. The vector operand is provided in vector register group `vs2`.
These reduction operations all use the `.vs` suffix in their mnemonics. Additionally, the reduction operations all produce a scalar result in element 0 of the destination register, `vd`.

For the vector crypto extensions, we have defined Vector-Scalar instructions that are similar to these
Vector Reduction Operations in that they get a scalar operand from a vector register. However, they differ
from the Reduction Operations in that they get a scalar element group
(see link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec/blob/master/element_groups.adoc[RISC-V Vector Element Groups])
from `vs2` and they return _vector_ results to `vd`, which is also a source vector operand.
These Vector-Scalar crypto instructions also use the `.vs` suffix in their mnemonics.

[NOTE]
====
We chose to use `vs2` as the scalar operand, and vd as the vector operand, so that we could use the `vs1`
specifier as additional encoding bits for these instructions. This allows these instructions to have a
much smaller encoding footprint, leaving more rooms for other instructions in the future.
====

These instructions enable a single key, specified as a scalar element group in `vs2`, to be
applied to each element group of register group `vd`.

[NOTE]
====
Scalar element groups will occupy at most a single register in application processors. However, in implementations where
VLEN<128, they will occupy 2 (VLEN=64) or 4 (LVEN=32) registers.
====


[NOTE]
====
It is common for multiple AES encryption rounds (for example) to be performed in parallel with the same
round key (e.g. in counter modes).
Rather than having to first splat the common key across the whole vector group, these vector-scalar
crypto instructions allow the round key to be specified as a scalar element group.
====

// In the case of AES256 all-rounds instructions we need to provide two 128-bit keys; one is held in `vs1` and
// the other is held in `vs2`. The 128-bit data to be processed is held in `vd`.
// A vector-scalar form of this instruction looks different from the existing vector-scalar instructions in that
// both `vs1` and `vs2` are treated as scalar operands that apply to the vector operands of `vd`. 

// [NOTE]
// ====
// Previously, the AES and SM4 instructions that performed rounds operations (including AES all-rounds instructions)
// were defined to be destructive operations where the data source was provided in `vd` and the key was provided in
// `vs2`. With the advent of the new crypto vector-scalar instructions, we are changing these instructions
// to use `vs1` for the key and `vs2` for the data.
// In the case of vector-scalar instructions, the scalar key will be held in
// element group 0 of `vs1` . This is done to remain consistent with the use of `vs1` for the scalar element in
// all of the existing vector-scalar operations as well as the vector reduction operations. 
// ====
