doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups.adoc, before:

[[crypto-vector-element-groups]]
=== Crypto Vector Element Groups

Many vector crypto instructions operate on larger operands than instructions in the base vector extension. Typically, these operands are 128- and 256-bits wide. In many cases, these operands are comprised of smaller elements that are combined. However, in other cases these operands are a single value. For example, AES operates on 128-bit blocks comprised of four 32-bit words using 128-bit round keys that are generated from 128-, 192-, and 256-bit cipher keys.

In order to be compatible with the 32- and 64-bit element widths of the base vector instructions,
we treat these operands as a vector of one of more element groups (see 
link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec/blob/master/element_groups.adoc[RISC-V Vector Element Groups]).

An element group is defined by three parameters, all of which are explicitly defined by each crypto instruction
that operates on them:

- Element Group Width (EGW) - total number of bits in an element group
- Element Group Size (EGS) - number of elements in an element group
- Effective Element Width (EEW) - number of bits in each element

When the EEW is explicitly defined for a vector crypto instruction, the current `SEW` is ignored by that instruction.

Note::
We chose to not require that the instructions with a fixed `EEW` only be executed with `SEW`=`EEW` so that
sophisticated coders could use other SEW values that are needed for other instructions without requiring
an additional `vsetvl`-type instruction.

As with all vector instructions, the number of elements processed by a vector instruction is specified by the
vector length `vl`. The number of element groups operated upon is then `vl`/`EGS`.
Using a Vector Crypto Instruction when this ratio is not an integer is reserved.

Tip::
To help ensure that the proper `vl` is used, programmers are encouraged to set `SEW` to match the `EEW` of the
instructions being executed. The `EEW` for each cryptographic instruction was chosen to match what is
typically needed for other instructions when implementing the targeted algorithm. 

Since `vstart` is expressed in elements, the starting element group is `vstart`/`EGS`. 
Using a Vector Crypto Instruction when this this ratio is not an integer is reserved.

The corresponding `EMUL` is calculated as `EMUL` = (`EEW`/`SEW`)*`LMUL`. If the `EMUL` would be out of range
(`EMUL`>8 or `EMUL`<1/8), the instruction encoding is reserved. 

For the best performance, it is suggested that Vector Crypto instructions be implemented in
vector units that have `VLEN` that is at least as wide as each instruction's `EGW`.
Element groups can be formed
across registers in implementations where `VLEN`< `EGW` by using an `LMUL`>1. 
However, use of an instruction with `VLEN`< `EEW` where `EEW`> `SEW` is reserved.

Note::
There is no need to check for `VLEN`< `EEW` for any Standard implementation, as
all Standard Vector Extensions require a minimum VLEN of at least 32 bits, and
the only Vector Crypto instructions that use EEW>32 require that SEW=EEW.

Systems which implement `VLEN` < `EGW` should consider the existing
Scalar Cryptography Extensions, specifically <<Zkne,Zkne>> and <<Zknd,Zknd>>
for accelerated cryptographic operations.

[%header,cols="4,4,4,4,4"]
|===
| Instruction Group
| Extension
| EGW
| EEW
| EGS

| AES      | <<zvkns>>            | 128 | 32 | 4
| SHA256   | <<zvknh,zvknh[ab]>>  | 128 | 32 | 4
| SHA512   | <<zvknh,zvknhb>>     | 256 | 64 | 4
| GCM      | <<zvkg>>             | 128 | 32 | 4
| SM4      | <<zvksed>>           | 128 | 32 | 4
| SM3      | <<Zvksh>>            | 256 | 32 | 8
|===

NB: Some of the new vector crypto instructions use SEW as usual. For example: rotate, CLMUL

Commit message:

Updated instructions so that they depend on SEW
Until now, most cryptographic instructions ignored SEW and operated on their defined EEW. This didn't seem to add any benefit, so the additional complexity that it imposed was not justifiable.

doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-element-groups.adoc, after:

[[crypto-vector-element-groups]]
=== Crypto Vector Element Groups

Many vector crypto instructions operate on larger operands than instructions in the base vector extension. Typically, these operands are 128- and 256-bits wide. In many cases, these operands are comprised of smaller elements that are combined. However, in other cases these operands are a single value. For example, AES operates on 128-bit blocks comprised of four 32-bit words using 128-bit round keys that are generated from 128-, 192-, and 256-bit cipher keys.

In order to be compatible with the 32- and 64-bit element widths of the base vector instructions,
we treat these operands as a vector of one of more element groups (see 
link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec/blob/master/element_groups.adoc[RISC-V Vector Element Groups]).

An element group is defined by three parameters, all of which are explicitly defined by each crypto instruction
that operates on them:

- Element Group Width (EGW) - total number of bits in an element group
- Element Group Size (EGS) - number of elements in an element group
- Effective Element Width (EEW) - number of bits in each element

For all of the vector crypto instructions in this specification, the current `EEW`=`SEW`.

As with all vector instructions, the number of elements processed by a vector instruction is specified by the
vector length `vl`. The number of element groups operated upon is then `vl`/`EGS`.
Using a Vector Crypto Instruction when this ratio is not an integer is reserved.

Note::
The required `SEW` for each cryptographic instruction was chosen to match what is
typically needed for other instructions when implementing the targeted algorithm. 

Since `vstart` is expressed in elements, the starting element group is `vstart`/`EGS`. 
Using a Vector Crypto Instruction when this this ratio is not an integer is reserved.

For the best performance, it is suggested that Vector Crypto instructions be implemented in
vector units that have `VLEN` that is at least as wide as each instruction's `EGW`.
Element groups can be formed
across registers in implementations where `VLEN`< `EGW` by using an `LMUL`>1.

Systems which implement `VLEN` < `EGW` should consider the existing
Scalar Cryptography Extensions, specifically <<Zkne,Zkne>> and <<Zknd,Zknd>>
for accelerated cryptographic operations.

[%header,cols="4,4,4,4,4"]
|===
| Instruction Group
| Extension
| EGW
| SEW
| EGS

| AES      | <<zvkns>>            | 128 | 32 | 4
| SHA256   | <<zvknh,zvknh[ab]>>  | 128 | 32 | 4
| SHA512   | <<zvknh,zvknhb>>     | 256 | 64 | 4
| GCM      | <<zvkg>>             | 128 | 32 | 4
| SM4      | <<zvksed>>           | 128 | 32 | 4
| SM3      | <<Zvksh>>            | 256 | 32 | 8
|===

NB: Some of the new vector crypto instructions use SEW as usual. For example: rotate, CLMUL
