doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-zvkt.adoc, before:

[[zvkt,Zvkt]]
=== `Zvkt` - Vector Data-Independent Execution Latency

The Zvkt extension requires all implemented instructions from the following list to be
executed with data-independent execution latency as defined in the 
link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases/tag/v1.0.1-scalar[RISC-V Scalar Cryptography Extensions specification].

The data-independent execution latency (DIEL) applies to all _data operands_ of an instruction, even those that are not a
part of the body or that are inactive. However, DIEL does not apply to other values such as vl, vtype,
and the mask (as specified by vm).
In some cases --- which are explicitly specified in the lists below --- operands that are used as control rather than data
are exempt from DIEL.

[NOTE]
====
It is important that the _values_ of elements that are not in the body or that are masked off do not affect the execution
latency of the instruction. Sometimes such elements contain data that also needs to be protected.
====

==== All <<Zvkb>> instructions:
- vclmul[h].v[vx]
- vrol.v[vx]
- vror.v[vxi]
- vbrev8.v
- vrev8.v
- vandn.v[vx]

==== add/sub
- v[r]sub.v[vx]
- vadd.v[ivx]
- vsub.v[vx]
- vwadd[u].[vw][vx]
- vwsub[u].[vw][vx]

==== add/sub with carry
- vadc.v[ivx]m
- vmadc.v[ivx][m]
- vmsbc.v[vx]m
- vsbc.v[vx]m

==== compare and set
- vmseq.v[vxi]
- vmsgt[u].v[xi]
- vmsle[u].v[xi]
- vmslt[u].v[xi]
- vmsne.v[ivx]

==== copy
- vmv.s.x
- vmv.v.[ivxs]
- vmv[1248]r.v

==== extend
- vsext.vf[248]
- vzext.vf[248]

==== logical
- vand.v[ivx]
- vm[n]or.mm
- vmand[n].mm
- vmnand.mm
- vmorn.mm
- vmx[n]or.mm
- vor.v[ivx]
- vxor.v[ivx]

==== multiply
- vmul[h].v[vx]
- vmulh[s]u.v[vx]
- vwmul.v[vx]
- vwmul[s]u.v[vx]

==== multiply-add
- vmacc.v[vx]
- vmadd.v[vx]
- vnmsac.v[vx]
- vnmsub.v[vx]
- vwmacc.v[vx]
- vwmacc[s]u.v[vx]
- vwmaccus.vx

==== permute
The values in `vs1`, `rs1`, `imm` are used for control and are exempt from DIEL.

- vmerge.v[ivx]m
- vrgather.v[ivx]
- vrgatherei16.vv

==== shift
The values in `vs1`, `rs1`, `imm` are used for control (i.e., shift amount) and are exempt from DIEL.

- vnsr[al].w[ivx]
- vsll.v[ivx]
- vsr[al].v[ivx]

==== slide
The values in `rs1` and `uimm` are used for control (i.e., slide amount) and are exempt from DIEL.

- vslide[up|down].v[ix]
- vslide1[up|down].vx

[NOTE]
====
The following instructions are not affected by Zvkt:
 
- *All storage operations*
- *All floating-point operations*
- add/sub saturate
* vsadd[u].v[ivx]
* vssub[u].v[vx]
- clip
* vnclip[u].w[ivx]
- compress
* vcompress.vm
- divide
* vdiv[u].v[vx]
* vrem[u].v[vx]
- average
* vaadd[u].v[vx]
* vasub[u].v[vx]
- mask Op
* vcpop.m
* vfirst.m
* vid.v
* viota.m
* vms[bio]f.m
- min/max
* vmax[u].v[vx]
* vmin[u].v[vx]
- Multiply-saturate
* vsmul.v[vx]
- reduce
* vredsum.vs
* vwredsum[u].vs
* vred[and|or|xor].vs
* vred[min|max][u].vs
- shift round
* vssra.v[ivx]
* vssrl.v[ivx]
- vset
* vsetivli
* vsetvl[i]
====

Commit message:

Changes based on feedback from AR
Zvbc: Break out carry-less multiply into it's own extension
Zvbb: New name for Zvkb
Zvbb new instructions: vwsll.v[vxi], vrev.v, vclz.v, vctz.v, vcpop.v
rename vbrev8.v to vrevb.v
Zvkt: change shift and merge to be fully DIEL, all of Zvbb are DIEL
Changed element group instructions to be reserved when vl isn't divisible by EGS

doc/vector/riscv-crypto-vector-zvkt.adoc, after:

[[zvkt,Zvkt]]
=== `Zvkt` - Vector Data-Independent Execution Latency

The Zvkt extension requires all implemented instructions from the following list to be
executed with data-independent execution latency as defined in the 
link:https://github.com/riscv/riscv-crypto/releases/tag/v1.0.1-scalar[RISC-V Scalar Cryptography Extensions specification].

The data-independent execution latency (DIEL) applies to all _data operands_ of an instruction, even those that are not a
part of the body or that are inactive. However, DIEL does not apply to other values such as vl, vtype,
and the mask (as specified by vm).
In some cases --- which are explicitly specified in the lists below --- operands that are used as control rather than data
are exempt from DIEL.

[NOTE]
====
It is important that the _values_ of elements that are not in the body or that are masked off do not affect the execution
latency of the instruction. Sometimes such elements contain data that also needs to be protected.
====

==== All <<Zvbb>> instructions:
- vandn.v[vx]
- vclz.v
- vcpop.v
- vctz.v
- vrev.v
- vrev8.v
- vrevb.v
- vrol.v[vx]
- vror.v[vxi]
- vwsll.[vv,vx,vi]

==== All <<Zvbc>> instructions
- vclmul[h].v[vx]

==== add/sub
- v[r]sub.v[vx]
- vadd.v[ivx]
- vsub.v[vx]
- vwadd[u].[vw][vx]
- vwsub[u].[vw][vx]

==== add/sub with carry
- vadc.v[ivx]m
- vmadc.v[ivx][m]
- vmsbc.v[vx]m
- vsbc.v[vx]m

==== compare and set
- vmseq.v[vxi]
- vmsgt[u].v[xi]
- vmsle[u].v[xi]
- vmslt[u].v[xi]
- vmsne.v[ivx]

==== copy
- vmv.s.x
- vmv.v.[ivxs]
- vmv[1248]r.v

==== extend
- vsext.vf[248]
- vzext.vf[248]

==== logical
- vand.v[ivx]
- vm[n]or.mm
- vmand[n].mm
- vmnand.mm
- vmorn.mm
- vmx[n]or.mm
- vor.v[ivx]
- vxor.v[ivx]

==== multiply
- vmul[h].v[vx]
- vmulh[s]u.v[vx]
- vwmul.v[vx]
- vwmul[s]u.v[vx]

==== multiply-add
- vmacc.v[vx]
- vmadd.v[vx]
- vnmsac.v[vx]
- vnmsub.v[vx]
- vwmacc.v[vx]
- vwmacc[s]u.v[vx]
- vwmaccus.vx

==== Integer Merge
- vmerge.v[ivx]m

==== permute
The values in `vs1`, `rs1`, `imm` are used for control and are exempt from DIEL.

- vrgather.v[ivx]
- vrgatherei16.vv

==== shift
// The values in `vs1`, `rs1`, `imm` are used for control (i.e., shift amount) and are exempt from DIEL.

- vnsr[al].w[ivx]
- vsll.v[ivx]
- vsr[al].v[ivx]

==== slide
The values in `rs1` and `uimm` are used for control (i.e., slide amount) and are exempt from DIEL.

- vslide[up|down].v[ix]
- vslide1[up|down].vx

[NOTE]
====
The following instructions are not affected by Zvkt:
 
- *All storage operations*
- *All floating-point operations*
- add/sub saturate
* vsadd[u].v[ivx]
* vssub[u].v[vx]
- clip
* vnclip[u].w[ivx]
- compress
* vcompress.vm
- divide
* vdiv[u].v[vx]
* vrem[u].v[vx]
- average
* vaadd[u].v[vx]
* vasub[u].v[vx]
- mask Op
* vcpop.m
* vfirst.m
* vid.v
* viota.m
* vms[bio]f.m
- min/max
* vmax[u].v[vx]
* vmin[u].v[vx]
- Multiply-saturate
* vsmul.v[vx]
- reduce
* vredsum.vs
* vwredsum[u].vs
* vred[and|or|xor].vs
* vred[min|max][u].vs
- shift round
* vssra.v[ivx]
* vssrl.v[ivx]
- vset
* vsetivli
* vsetvl[i]
====
