doc/vector-extra/riscv-crypto-vector-zvkgs.adoc, before:

[[zvkg,Zvkg]]
=== `Zvkg` - Vector GCM/GMAC

Instructions to enable the efficient implementation of GHASH~H~ which is used in Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and
Galois Message Authentication Code (GMAC).

All of these instructions work on 128-bit element groups comprised of four 32-bit elements.

GHASH~H~ is defined in the
// link:https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-38d/final[NIST Special Publication 800-38D]
 "Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and GMAC"
 cite:[nist:gcm]
(NIST Specification).

[NOTE]
====
GCM is used in conjunction with block ciphers (e.g., AES and SM4) to encrypt a message and
provide authentication.
GMAC is used to provide authentication of a message without encryption.
====

To help avoid side-channel timing attacks, these instructions shall be implemented with data-independent timing.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="^2,4,4,4"]
|===

|SEW
|EGW
|Mnemonic
|Instruction
| 32 | 128 | vghsh.vv | <<insns-vghsh>>
| 32 | 128 | vgmul.vv | <<insns-vgmul>>

|===

Commit message:

refactoring Zvkgs and vghsh.vs specifications

doc/vector-extra/riscv-crypto-vector-zvkgs.adoc, after:

[[zvkgs,Zvkgs]]
=== `Zvkgs` - Vector-Scalar GCM/GMAC

`Zvkgs` depends on `Zvkg`, it extends the existing `vghsh.vv` and `vgmul.vv` instructions with new vector-scalar variants: `vghsh.vs` and `vgmul.vs`.

Instructions to enable the efficient implementation of parallel versions of GHASH~H~ which is used in Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and
Galois Message Authentication Code (GMAC).

The instructions inherit the same constraints (element group size, data independent execution timing and `vl`/`vstart` multiple constraints).

All of these instructions work on 128-bit element groups comprised of four 32-bit elements.

To help avoid side-channel timing attacks, these instructions shall be implemented with data-independent timing.

The number of element groups to be processed is `vl`/`EGS`.
`vl` must be set to the number of `SEW=32` elements to be processed and
therefore must be a multiple of `EGS=4`. +
Likewise, `vstart` must be a multiple of `EGS=4`.

[%autowidth]
[%header,cols="^2,4,4,4"]
|===

|SEW
|EGW
|Mnemonic
|Instruction
| 32 | 128 | vghsh.vs | <<insns-vghsh-vs>>
| 32 | 128 | vgmul.vs | <<insns-vgmul-vs>>

|===
