benchmarks/README.md, before:


# RISC-V Crypto Benchmarking

*A description of how the RISC-V Crypto extension benchmarking suite works.*

---

## Purpose

1. To evaluate a set of *popular* cryptographic algorithms on the *baseline*
   RISC-V architecture.
   These include:

   - The usual suspects from NIST:
     AES, SHA256, SHA512, SHA3/SHAKE/CSHAKE

   - Other standardised and widely used algorithms:
     ChaCha20, SM4

   - Primitive operations which are used *under the hood* in various
     cryptographic systems and protocols:
     Long Multiply, Modular Exponentiation etc.

2. To evaluate said algorithms on extended *variants* of the RISC-V
   architecture, and provide supporting evidence for proposed
   standard extensions to the ISA.
   Said variants include:

   - The
     [Bitmanip](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-bitmanip)
     `B` extension, which is currently nearing ratification.

   - The WIP `scalar` and `vector` cryptography extensions to RISC-V.

3. To provide a set of *secure and efficient* reference implementations
   of popular cryptographic algorithms for use with various
   RISC-V architectures.

4. To also provide optimised implementations for contributed cryptographic
   algorithms to assess the general usability of the RISC-V architecture
   from a cryptographic perspective.


## Organisation

- `config/` - Contains various toolchain configurations, allowing the
    same programs to be compiled and evaluated against different target
    architectures. Currently defined are combinations of `RV32`/`RV64`
    with(out) the `B`itmanip extension, and with(out) the proposed
    scalar cryptography extensions.

- `share/` - General useful code / macros and instruction intrinsics.

- `test/` - Testbench programs for checking the correctness and performance
    of different algorithms.

- `crypto_hash/` - Hash algorithm implementations.
    Each directory under `crypto_has/` represents a single hash
    algorithm (SHA256/SHA512/SHA3 etc). Each algorithm may have several
    different implementations, optimising for different things, e.g. code size
    and/or performance.

### Makefile Structure

- The `common.mk` file contains useful macros for building libraries,
    objects and test executables.

- The top level `Makefile` *includes* `common.mk` and sub-makefiles in
    `crypto_hash/`, `test/` and so on.

- Each algorithm implementation has its own `Makefile.in`, which
  describes how to build a static library which can be linked against by
  a test program.

  - The static libraries are built with the intention of making it very
    easy to compile against them and run the same programs on different
    target simulators / devices.

- One *must* explicitly specify a build config using the `CONFIG=X` option.
  when invoking make:
    ```sh
    $> cd $REPO_HOME/benchmarks
    $> make all CONFIG=rv32-baseline-b
    $> make all CONFIG=rv32-baseline
    $> make all CONFIG=rv32-zscrypto
    $> make all CONFIG=rv64-baseline-b
    $> make all CONFIG=rv64-baseline
    $> make all CONFIG=rv64-zscrypto
    ```

  These configs are kept in the `$REPO_HOME/benchmarks/config/` directory,
  and specify different compiler and architecture flag combinations.

  - **Note:** Not all targets are expected to build for all configurations.
    E.g. the SHA512 `zscrypto` benchmark will not work on an `rv32-*`
    target, since it requires 64-bit only instructions.

- Build results will be placed in `$REPO_BUILD/benchmarks/[CONFIG]/*`.

- For those without tab-completion, running
  ```sh
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline print-build-targets
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline print-all-targets
  ```
  Will tell you which build / simulation targets there are.

### Running tests:

- Tests live in the `test/` directory, with one test *per algorithm*.
  A file is then linked against each different algorithm static library.

- To run all of the tests for a given config:
  ```sh
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline run
  ```

- Or see which run targets are available:
  ```sh
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline print-run-targets
  ```

- The results of a run are placed in
  `$REPO_BUILD/benchmarks/[CONFIG]/log/test/*`.
  Each log file contains the `stdout` of the test, including instruction
  execution counts.

Commit message:

Add doxygen support.
- No code changes, but lots of comment changes to get everything consistent

 On branch master
 Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'.

 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   Makefile
	modified:   README.md
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha256/api_sha256.h
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha256/reference/blocks_sha256.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha256/reference/hash_sha256.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha256/zscrypto/blocks_sha256.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha256/zscrypto/hash_sha256.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha3/Keccak.h
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha3/fips202.h
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha3/opt_size_baseline/Keccak.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha3/opt_size_zscrypto/Keccak.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha3/reference/Keccak.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha512/api_sha512.h
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha512/reference/blocks_sha512.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha512/reference/hash_sha512.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha512/zscrypto/blocks_sha512.c
	modified:   crypto_hash/sha512/zscrypto/hash_sha512.c
	new file:   doxygen.conf
	new file:   share/test.c
	modified:   share/test.h
	modified:   test/test_hash_sha256.c

benchmarks/README.md, after:


# RISC-V Crypto Benchmarking

*A description of how the RISC-V Crypto extension benchmarking suite works.*

---

## Purpose

1. To evaluate a set of *popular* cryptographic algorithms on the *baseline*
   RISC-V architecture.
   These include:

   - The usual suspects from NIST:
     AES, SHA256, SHA512, SHA3/SHAKE/CSHAKE

   - Other standardised and widely used algorithms:
     ChaCha20, SM4

   - Primitive operations which are used *under the hood* in various
     cryptographic systems and protocols:
     Long Multiply, Modular Exponentiation etc.

2. To evaluate said algorithms on extended *variants* of the RISC-V
   architecture, and provide supporting evidence for proposed
   standard extensions to the ISA.
   Said variants include:

   - The
     [Bitmanip](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-bitmanip)
     `B` extension, which is currently nearing ratification.

   - The WIP `scalar` and `vector` cryptography extensions to RISC-V.

3. To provide a set of *secure and efficient* reference implementations
   of popular cryptographic algorithms for use with various
   RISC-V architectures.

4. To also provide optimised implementations for contributed cryptographic
   algorithms to assess the general usability of the RISC-V architecture
   from a cryptographic perspective.


## Organisation

- `config/` - Contains various toolchain configurations, allowing the
    same programs to be compiled and evaluated against different target
    architectures. Currently defined are combinations of `RV32`/`RV64`
    with(out) the `B`itmanip extension, and with(out) the proposed
    scalar cryptography extensions.

- `share/` - General useful code / macros and instruction intrinsics.

- `test/` - Testbench programs for checking the correctness and performance
    of different algorithms.

- `crypto_hash/` - Hash algorithm implementations.
    Each directory under `crypto_has/` represents a single hash
    algorithm (SHA256/SHA512/SHA3 etc). Each algorithm may have several
    different implementations, optimising for different things, e.g. code size
    and/or performance.

- Code is documented using [Doxygen](http://www.doxygen.nl/index.html).
  You can build the doxygen documentation using:
  ```sh
  make doxygen CONFIG=rv64-baseline
  ```
  which will place the output in `$REPO_BUILD/benchmarks/doxygen`.

### Makefile Structure

- The `common.mk` file contains useful macros for building libraries,
    objects and test executables.

- The top level `Makefile` *includes* `common.mk` and sub-makefiles in
    `crypto_hash/`, `test/` and so on.

- Each algorithm implementation has its own `Makefile.in`, which
  describes how to build a static library which can be linked against by
  a test program.

  - The static libraries are built with the intention of making it very
    easy to compile against them and run the same programs on different
    target simulators / devices.

- One *must* explicitly specify a build config using the `CONFIG=X` option.
  when invoking make:
    ```sh
    $> cd $REPO_HOME/benchmarks
    $> make all CONFIG=rv32-baseline-b
    $> make all CONFIG=rv32-baseline
    $> make all CONFIG=rv32-zscrypto
    $> make all CONFIG=rv64-baseline-b
    $> make all CONFIG=rv64-baseline
    $> make all CONFIG=rv64-zscrypto
    ```

  These configs are kept in the `$REPO_HOME/benchmarks/config/` directory,
  and specify different compiler and architecture flag combinations.

  - **Note:** Not all targets are expected to build for all configurations.
    E.g. the SHA512 `zscrypto` benchmark will not work on an `rv32-*`
    target, since it requires 64-bit only instructions.

- Build results will be placed in `$REPO_BUILD/benchmarks/[CONFIG]/*`.

- For those without tab-completion, running
  ```sh
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline print-build-targets
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline print-all-targets
  ```
  Will tell you which build / simulation targets there are.

### Running tests:

- Tests live in the `test/` directory, with one test *per algorithm*.
  A file is then linked against each different algorithm static library.

- To run all of the tests for a given config:
  ```sh
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline run
  ```

- Or see which run targets are available:
  ```sh
  $> make CONFIG=rv64-baseline print-run-targets
  ```

- The results of a run are placed in
  `$REPO_BUILD/benchmarks/[CONFIG]/log/test/*`.
  Each log file contains the `stdout` of the test, including instruction
  execution counts.
